2014

C I T Y O F F O R T L A U DE R D A L E

FY 2014 Adopted BUDGET

CITY OF FORT LAUDERDALE

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
CITY COMMISSION
John P. “Jack” Seiler
Mayor
Bruce G. Roberts
Vice Mayor, District I
Dean J. Trantalis
Commissioner, District II

Bobby B. DuBose
Commissioner, District III

Romney Rogers
Commissioner, District IV

Lee R. Feldman, ICMA-CM
City Manager

Cynthia Everett
City Attorney

John Herbst
City Auditor

Jonda Joseph
City Clerk

fort lauderdale city commission

Bruce G. Roberts

Dean J. Trantalis

John P. “Jack” Seiler

Bobby B. DuBose

Romney Rogers

Vice Mayor, District I

Commissioner, District II

Mayor

Commissioner, District III

Commissioner, District IV

 

   Lee R. Feldman, ICMA‐CM 
City Manager 
 

Stanley D. Hawthorne 

 

Susanne M. Torriente

 Assistant City Manager                         Assistant City Manager 

Department Directors 
 
 

Douglas R. Wood 
Director of Finance 
 

Robert Hoecherl 
Fire Chief 
 

Averill Dorse  
Director of Human Resources 
 

Mike Maier 
Informa on Technology  Services Director/Chief Technology Oﬃcer 
 

Phillip Thornburg 
Director of Parks and Recrea on 
 

Frank Adderley 
Police Chief 
 

Hardeep Anand 
Director of Public Works 
 

Greg Brewton 
Director of Sustainable Development 
 

Diana Alarcon 
 

Director of Transporta on and Mobility 

 

 

The Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada (GFOA)
presented the award of Distinguished Budget Presentation to the City of Fort Lauderdale,
Florida for its annual budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2012.
In order to receive this award, a governmental unit must publish a budget document that
meets stringent program criteria as a policy document, as an operations guide, as a
financial plan, and as a communications device.
This is the 29th consecutive year that the City of Fort Lauderdale has
received this distinguished and notable award.

Acknowledgments
CITY MANAGER
Lee R. Feldman, ICMA-CM
Stanley Hawthorne, Assistant City Manager
Susanne Torriente, Assistant City Manager

BUDGET/CIP & GRANTS
Emilie R. Smith, Budget Manager
Norman Mason, Assistant Budget Manager
Laura Aker Reece, Assistant CIP & Grants Manager
Diane Lichenstein, Senior Financial Management Analyst
Bobbi Williams, Senior Financial Management Analyst
Jaclyn Meli, Grants Administration and Compliance Officer
Charmaine Eccles, Administrative Assistant
Barbara Smith, Administrative Assistant
Marcos Nichols, Senior Management Fellow

STRUCTURAL INNOVATION
Amy Knowles, Structural Innovation Manager
Paula Romo, Senior Performance Analyst
Sarah Saunders, Performance Analyst
Samantha Timko, Senior Management Fellow
Donna Samuda, Administrative Assistant

PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Chaz Adams, Public Affairs Manager
Eden Volkert, Graphic Designer

BUDGET COORDINATORS
City Attorney’s Office, Maureen Richards
City Auditor’s Office, Alexandria Woolweaver
City Clerk’s Office, Jeff Modarelli
City Commission’s Office, Maxine Singh
City Manager’s Office, Charmaine Eccles
Finance Department, Marian Dollard
Fire-Rescue Department, Paul Vanden-Berge
Human Resources Department, Stephanie Artis
Information Technology Services Department, Diana Scott
Parks and Recreation Department, Kim Clifford
Police Department, Dafne Perez
Public Works Department, Susan LeSage and Kym Holcolmbe
Sustainable Development Department, Valerie Florestal
Transportation and Mobility Department, Onesi Girona

Special thanks to the Revenue Estimating Conference Committee, the Budget Advisory Board, staff members
in the City Manager’s Office, Finance, Information Technology Services, Print Shop, and the many other
staff members throughout each department for their efforts and assistance during the budget
development process and in the preparation of this document.

Reader’s Guide
We’ve made every effort to make this book as
easy as possible to read, but we understand how
difficult it can be to find what you’re looking for in
such a complex document. To make your search
easier, we’ve provided a number of tools to help
you get what you need. A Table of Contents is
provided on the following page and a glossary of
commonly used terms and acronyms is included in
the appendix section. In addition, a combination
of charts and graphs are used to clarify and
enhance data.
The FY 2014 Adopted Budget consists of six (6)
major sections: Introduction, Budget Overview,
Financials, Department Budgets, Community
Investment Plan, and Appendix.
Introduction - This section contains the City
Manager’s Message for the FY 2014 Adopted
Budget. You will gain an understanding of the City
Manager’s “We Build Community” philosophy and
“Fast Forward” Vision for the City. The budget
message provides highlights of the budget
development, new initiatives, current and future
challenges, and any tax or fee changes adopted for
the coming year.
Budget Overview - This section provides key
components that make up the FY 2014 Adopted
Budget. It is essentially a “Budget in Brief.” It
contains a citywide organizational chart, strategic
plan to support the City’s vision, budgetary and
financial policies that guided the adopted budget,
program highlights for each department, and fund
descriptions with a financial summary. It further
provides the staffing levels and a comparison of
population and millage rates to other
municipalities.
Financials - This section provides detailed revenue
and expenditures for the General Fund and all
other operating funds. Financial schedules in this
section provide a comparison of the FY 2012
Actual, FY 2013 Amended Budget, and FY 2014

Adopted Budget. This section also provides the
debt service requirements and projected fund
balances for the year ending September 30, 2014.
Department Budgets - This section provides an
overview of each department. For each
department,
this
section
includes
an
organizational chart, a description of the core
services, key performance indicators, and a threeyear financial comparison, which includes the FY
2014 Adopted Budget. Key performance indicators
and benchmarking is provided as an ongoing tool
to measure efficiencies and effectiveness
throughout each department.
Community Investment Plan - This section
provides a summary of the adopted Five-Year
Community Investment Plan which is made up of
citywide capital improvements. It discusses the
projects, the Cylinders of Excellence, project
prioritization, weighting criteria used to rank
projects, and the funding appropriation for each
adopted project. It also includes the FY 2014
impact on the operating budget.
Appendix - This section provides an economic
analysis, a geographic map of the City, general
information, and select statistical information.
Also provided is a glossary of commonly used
terminology and acronyms.

Table of Contents
Introduction

Financials

City Manager's Budget Message

Introduction and Overview

65

FY 2014 Adopted All Funds Operating Budgets

66

FY 2013 Adopted All Funds Operating Budgets

68

All Funds Revenue Summary

70

Venice of America

i

Budget Overview
Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle

1

All Funds Expenditure Summary

71

Citywide Organizational Chart

2

General Fund Revenue Summary

72

Budget Overview

4

General Fund Expenditure Summary

73

Budget Development Process

5

General Fund Transfers

74

Budget Calendar

6

Fund Balance Projections

75

Budgetary Basis

7

Long Term Debt Obligations

76

Property Tax Millage Summary

8

Department Highlights

9

Department Budgets

Staffing Levels

11

Introduction and Overview

Changes to Personnel Complement

12

Charter Offices

Vision Plan, Strategic Plan, and Budget

15

City Attorney

81

Major Revenue Sources

21

City Auditor

85

Major Expenditures Categories

26

City Clerk

89

Fund Descriptions

29

City Commission

93

Fund Highlights

31

City Manager

97

All Funds Summary

36

Other General Government

107

General Fund

37

Sunrise Key

108

Airport System Fund

38

Finance

109

Arts & Science District Garage Fund

39

Fire-Rescue

119

Beach Business Improvement District Fund

40

Human Resources

127

Building Funds

41

Information Technology Services

137

Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund

42

Parks and Recreation

153

77

Central Regional Wastewater System Fund

43

Police

167

Central Services Fund

44

Public Works

182

City Insurance Fund

45

Sustainable Development

199

CRA - Central Beach Area Fund

46

Transportation and Mobility

213

CRA - Central City Area Fund

47

CRA - NW Progresso Flagler Heights Area Fund

48

Five Year Community Investment Plan

DEA Confiscation Property Fund

49

Introduction and Overview

225

Housing & Community Development Grants Fund

50

CIP Prioritization Criteria

226

Parking System Fund

51

FY 2014 Operating Impact

228

Police Confiscation Fund

52

FY 2014 Funding by Cylinder of Excellence

231

Five Year CIP by Funding Source

238

Sanitation Fund

53

School Crossing Guards Fund

54

Self-Insured Health Benefits Fund

55

Appendix

Stormwater Fund

56

Strategic Planning & Budgeting Cycle & Narrative

259

Sunrise Key Safe Neighborhood District Fund

57

Economy and Demographics

267

Vehicle Rental Fund (Fleet)

58

City Recreation and Infrastructure

269

Water & Sewer Fund

59

Desirable City for a Successful Business

270

Financial Policies

60

Nonagricultural Employment by Industry

274

Glossary of Terms and Acronyms

275

CITY OF

FORT LAUDERDALE
City Manager’s Office

December 1, 2013
Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Commission:
In accordance with the City Charter and Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State of Florida, I
have prepared and now present the adopted budget for Fiscal Year 2014. A copy of the adopted
budget is available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. Additionally, a user-friendly
electronic copy of the adopted budget is located on the City’s website.

Budget Overview
The FY 2014 total adopted budget for all funds is $549,896,806 which does not include balances,
reserves, and transfers. This is approximately $37 million less than the FY 2013 Amended Budget
of $586,851,870. The FY 2014 Adopted Budget is a strategic budget that aligns financial and
employee resources with the City of Fort Lauderdale’s 2035 Vision - “Fast Forward Fort
Lauderdale,” “Press Play Fort Lauderdale” –the City’s five-year strategic plan, the City Commission
Annual Action Plan, and our neighbor’s priorities. It provides for investments in public safety,
mobility, infrastructure, high performance management, quality development, and also
recognizes that partnerships are important to excellent service delivery.
It is important to understand that there is as much art as there is science involved in the
promotion and retention of good fiscal health. Most importantly, the key to navigating through
tough economic conditions is to be proactive about potential challenges that could impact the
fiscal health and revenue raising capacity of a municipality. Maintaining good fiscal health is
necessary for a municipality to remain resilient and provide a high level of uninterrupted services
to its neighbors, even during difficult financial times.
The City’s economy is slowly recovering after the downturn that Fort Lauderdale, like the rest of
the nation, endured. City property values declined rapidly from their peak in 2008. Despite the
dramatic impact of several years of significant revenue reductions, exacerbated by unfunded
mandates and decreases in intergovernmental revenues, the City has preserved service levels for
our neighbors and proudly maintained its low 4.1193 operating millage rate. During the time of

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 2 of 19

shrinking property values, the City’s ad valorem tax revenue was reduced from approximately
$130 million in FY 2007 to a low of approximately $92.4 million in FY 2012. In order to maintain
existing service levels without a tax rate increase to Fort Lauderdale neighbors, the City
implemented numerous cost saving measures and relied on fund balance reserves. The
workforce was reduced, priorities were reevaluated, discretionary spending was cut,
maintenance and fleet purchases were deferred, departments were for efficiency, and budgets
were incrementally reduced through a strategic and managed process. The cumulative effect of
these efforts has been substantial, however, it is still not enough to structurally balance the
budget without an increase in revenues or a significant decrease in the quality and quantity of
services provided to our neighbors.

FY 2014 All Funds Adopted Budget - $549.9 million
In Millions

Parking
$14.3
2.6%
Stormwater
$6.0
1.1%

Airport
$7.2
1.4%

Internal
Services
$70.5
12.8%

Other
$6.0
1.1%
General Fund
$248.0
45.0%

Water & Sewer/
Central Regional
Wastewater
$119.1
21.7%

Sanitation
$20.0
3.6%

Debt Service
$34.6
6.3%

Building
$10.8
2.0%

Community
Housing & Redevelopment
$3.4
Community
0.6%
$10.0
1.8%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 3 of 19

Building Our Community
Maintaining the Quality of Life in the City - All too often, cities, when faced with multiple
years of lost revenue, tend to reduce their support for quality of life features, thereby sacrificing
some of what made them special, in the interest of funding other critical needs. While
sometimes these tradeoffs are necessary, the City has committed to the importance of these
amenities and continues to provide services at the full levels that our neighbors deserve and
expect. Besides an intrinsic value, these assets have an economic, revenue-generating value as
well. Therefore, we continue to focus our efforts on maintaining our neighbors’ quality of life.
There has been no loss of traditional days serving our neighbors at our various recreational
facilities and our City-sponsored community events have continued uninterrupted. Since 2008,
the City acquired and now maintains four (4) new parks; Lewis Landing, Gore Betz, Twin Lakes,
and Hortt. In addition, we made significant improvements and held grand openings at the
following parks; Ann Herman, Coontie Hatchee, Northfork, Peter Feldman, Bill Keith, Dolphin
Isles, Harbordale, Coral Ridge, South Middle River, Twin Lakes, Hortt, Stranahan Landing, and of
course Carter Park. We are committed to maintaining the quality of life in Fort Lauderdale and
“building community.”
Maintaining the City's Infrastructure - The City's infrastructure, be it water, wastewater,
stormwater, streets, canals, marinas, or parks provides the foundation of the City. Quality, wellmaintained infrastructure supports all aspects of city life. Community Investment Projects have
not slowed in these areas. We have equipment, technology, and infrastructure needs that have
not been funded in other areas during the last several years, but we are recommitted to these
needs and you will see recommendations in this budget that support these initiatives.
Ensuring the Safety of our Neighbors - Public Safety services that assure quality and
timely Police and Fire protection, as well as Emergency Medical response, are likewise essential.
Since 2008, the City has opened seven (7) new Fire-Rescue Stations throughout the City. Three
more are underway. There have been no reductions in Police or Fire-Rescue services during these
challenging budget years. The City is fully committed to ensuring the safety of our neighbors and
our visitors.
Leading With Efficiencies - We continually review operations to find new and innovative
ways to provide services to our neighbors in the most efficient way possible. These efficiencies
are derived primarily from staff thinking innovatively, lean process improvements, technological
enhancements, schedule alignments, and overall reinventing the way we do business. We are
working smarter, faster, and cheaper.
Enhanced Programs and Services – As revenues were shrinking and employees were
asked to do more with less, the City charged ahead with the satisfaction of our neighbors in mind.
The City boasts new and enhanced services in all areas of the organization. Highlights of these
include expedited permitting, a new lien amnesty program, new inter-facility transport services,

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 4 of 19

on-line job applications, telephone town hall meetings, a new sailing program, enhanced
payment options for City bills, easier access to Commission Meeting agendas and meeting
minutes, a single stream recycling program, commercial corridor code enforcement, expanded
trolley services, additional business education seminars, a juvenile citation program, introduction
of the SmartWater program for crime prevention, citywide covered bus shelters, red light camera
program, weekend code enforcement, and significant improvements to Sistrunk Boulevard. We
are committed.
Neighbor Survey
As stated by the International City and County Management Association (ICMA), “The first and
last measure of good government is citizen satisfaction.” In December 2012, the City of Fort
Lauderdale conducted a Neighbor Survey that can be used to measure service performance; to
benchmark service quality ratings; to assess community needs; to make long-range, short-term,
or strategic plans; to demonstrate the receptivity of our government; to evaluate potential
policies or community characteristics; or to use as a tool for evaluating employee performance.
Our local government officials should be as well informed about neighbor perspectives as the
best businesses.
Results from the survey indicated that neighbors rated the City as very high as a place to live, a
place for play and leisure, and a place to visit. The most critical opportunities for improvement
that were identified through the survey were flooding and the prevention of crime. Other areas
that were identified as high-priority for our neighbors included the overall flow of traffic,
maintenance of City streets, sidewalk and infrastructure, cleanliness of waterways, how well the
City is preparing for the future and how well the City is prepared for disasters. In addition, the
three most important priorities identified for the City’s Community Investment Plan were
walkable and bikeable streets, pavement rehabilitation and roadway repairs, and wastewater
collection/water distribution improvements.
This information was synthesized with the City’s Vision for 2035 - “Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale,”
and resulted in the identification of the highest priorities for the City of Fort Lauderdale
neighbors. The process was designed to capture a plurality of perspectives, through wide
representation at meetings and the geographical diversity of locations throughout the City.
Connecting the Dots
The goals and priorities established by the City Commission through the numerous goal setting
sessions and through the recent adoption of Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale were used as a guide
to prioritize projects and funding in the FY 2014 budget. As discussed, the adopted budget
document also supports the priorities identified by the neighbor survey completed in December.
The Five-Year Strategic Plan – “Press Play Fort Lauderdale” was recently adopted was used as a
tool to inform the budget process, align resources with priorities, and make clear commitments
to action.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 5 of 19

Vision, innovation, partnerships, and dedicated employees are the bedrock of the City’s
endeavors to ensure a rewarding and successful future for our community. We must maintain our
continued focus on enhancing long-term fiscal strength and sustainability for the community.
Departments have committed to outstanding service levels with expenditures strategically linked
to the goals, objectives, core services, and priorities of the City Commission and our neighbors. I
am committed to a financially sound government, a sustainable City, world class municipal
services, a strong partnership with our neighbors, and a safe and walkable community to attract
and retain families and quality economic development opportunities and foster a sustainable
downtown development. This outcome continues to be accomplished through quality economic
development and the continuation of strategic investments that build upon those made over the
last decade. We will not rest on our laurels; we will remain focused on our long term Vision 2035
and the Five-Year Strategic Plan. The provision of exceptional city services will continue as will
collaborative, innovative efforts to Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale.

“We are Fort Lauderdale, a community of choice.
We are the City you never want to leave.”

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 6 of 19

The Fiscal Year 2014 Adopted Budget and Community Investment Plan addresses the identified
priorities through specific projects and program enhancements such as:











Extensive Investment in the City’s wastewater collection/water distribution system
Updates to our City Ordinances to Reflect Adopted Master Plans - $400,000
Northwest Neighborhood Pedestrian Pathway Improvements - $1.0 million
Technology Improvements and a Camera and Security Program - $700,000
Sidewalk and Paver Repairs and Replacements - $780,000
Streetscape and Corridor Improvements - $1.4 million
Master Plan for Citywide Bridges - $250,000
Downtown Walkability Projects - $500,000
South Middle River Roadways - $424,100
Street Resurfacing - $1.2 million

The City of Fort Lauderdale is making great strides in implementing an innovative, results focused
government culture. Management and strategic planning teams are aligning and refining the
preliminary Strategic Plan goals, objectives, initiatives, and performance indicators. Our goal and
objective is to deliver efficient and quality city services to our neighbors and to fulfill the priorities
for the upcoming year. Connecting the dots.
General Fund
The FY 2014 Adopted General Fund operating expenditures plus transfers is $284,145,715. This
represents a 0.14% decrease from the FY 2013 Amended Budget of $284,554,544. The budget
requests from departments initially identified a deficit of more than $22 million in the General
Fund. This initial deficit was reduced by approximately $7 million when Broward County made
the determination to fund the E911 dispatch services. In addition, staff was tasked with
evaluating service and program reductions to further reduce the projected deficit. The full list of
initiatives was presented to you in the FY 2014 Preliminary Budget. These initiatives did not serve
to close the gap, however they demonstrate the ongoing commitment to reduce the City’s longterm structural budget deficit, and the charge to do so much more, with so much less.
In an effort to further close the gap in the FY 2014 Adopted Budget, operational strategies were
utilized including outsourcing the architecture services function, eliminating the vacant Economic
Business Development Manager position, increasing the field use fees for seasonal sports,
transferring beach cleaning to the Sanitation Fund, and eliminating membership to the Florida
Benchmarking Consortium. We continue to impose the Return on Investment (ROI) as a
percentage of assets to ensure that the General Fund is recovering the appropriate return on
investment in the proprietary funds. In addition, we are continuing the Payment In Lieu Of Taxes
(PILOT) imposed on the Airport Fund and the Arts and Science District Garage Fund, and to
cemetery operations, equivalent to what the City’s adopted operating millage rate would yield in
property taxes. Unfortunately, other revenues continue to decrease year over year which puts

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 7 of 19

more pressure on the City to make up the difference. For FY 2014, the Communications Services
Tax revenue came in $1 million lower than last year at $12.6 million, which is $3.5 million less
than the FY 2009 high of $16.1 million.
Budget modifications in the General Fund include $362,442 for four new positions to establish a
Quality Assurance/Quality Control Project team in the Public Works Department, $89,053 for one
new Project Manager to design and manage projects for the Transportation and Mobility
Department, $84,506 for a new Organizational Development and Training Coordinator, $53,937
for an Administrative Aide in the Sustainable Development Department, $45,100 for ongoing
railway signal maintenance and licenses to comply with long-standing agreements with the FEC
railway, $32,295 for a part-time Homeless Coordinator position, and $20,000 for the Fire-Rescue
accreditation. Capital outlay has also been included for the replacement of police laptops for
$700,000, technology enhancements in the Human Resources training room for $30,000, a box
truck to transport special event supplies and equipment for $25,000, and lighting upgrades in the
North Beach Village Neighborhood in the amount of $20,000. The adopted budget also includes
the Commission Annual Action Plan priorities as described in the previous section.
In FY 2013, the City made a $1.1 million contribution to the WAVE Streetcar project which was
just a portion of the City’s total commitment of $10.5 million. The balance of $9.4 million will be
provided for through the transference of City owned land and a cash contribution, if the land is
not valued at the full $9.4 million. The cash contribution will be realized through the sale of
surplus City owned land. Additionally, the City levied a special assessment for the WAVE to
support debt in the amount of $22.6 million.
In this era of shrinking budgets and increasing demands for high-quality service, productivity
becomes even more critical. The cost of doing business continues to increase and the city’s
capital assets must be maintained. Performance indicators continue to be refined and utilized to
inform our decision-making. I am confident that the decisions we make today are laying the
foundation for a fiscally sound and sustainable future for the City of Fort Lauderdale. The FY 2014
Adopted Budget does not include use of reserves to balance the budget; the FY 2014 Budget is
structurally balanced.
The City Commission policy for the General Fund fund balance is a minimum of two months or
16.6% of the General Fund Budget including necessary transfers. The FY 2014 Adopted Budget
meets that policy with a fund balance of $54.0 million or 19.0%, projected for the year ending
September 30, 2014. During FY 2014, we will realize the benefit of our 2011 prepayment to the
Police and Fire Pension Plan, which will return $13.2 million back to the General Fund available
fund balance. This amount is reflected in the increase in the fund balance from FY 2013 to FY
2014 on the chart below. A ten-year history of the General Fund balances is presented on the
next page.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 8 of 19

General Fund Available Fund Balance and
As a Percent of the Total Operating Budget

The FY 2014 Adopted Budget maintains adequate fund balance in all operating funds, continues
funding major capital projects to help stimulate the economy, and maintains core services
throughout the organization. The City of Fort Lauderdale is committed to improving productivity,
streamlining expenses and developing a stronger, more effective organization. The City has
embraced fiscal responsibility, accountability, high ethical standards and quality delivery of
services. It is a vision that rewards excellence, not mediocrity, and above all, places the neighbors
of Fort Lauderdale first.
Property Taxes
The change in the taxable value of property on an annual basis is always a primary concern for us
as the receipts from the related ad valorem taxes provides a significant amount of the general
fund’s operating revenue. While this year, the City was fortunate to have experienced a negligible
increase in gross taxable value, the corresponding increase in revenue was not sufficient to close
the initial budget gap of $22 million.
The City of Fort Lauderdale total certified taxable assessed valuation is $24.7 billion, an increase
of $1.0 million, or 4.49%, from the prior year final valuation. The net new construction assessed
valuation during the last year totaled $57.9 million. The chart on the next page presents the
taxable values and net new construction for the last seven years.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 9 of 19

Taxable Value & Millage Comparison
Calendar
Tax Year
2013-Certified

Net New
Construction
$

57,905,666

Increase/Decrease
from Prior Year

Operating
Millage Rate

24,672,804,316

4.49%

4.1193

Total Taxable Value
$

2012 Final

202,371,590

23,620,147,485

1.12%

4.1193

2011 Final

97,950,210

23,358,512,246

-4.24%

4.1193

2010 Final

494,110,613

24,393,809,310

-11.04%

4.1193

2009 Final

271,277,218

27,422,141,727

-9.73%

4.1193

2008 Final

625,354,578

30,378,384,604

-2.96%

4.1193

31,305,074,356

10.96%

4.8066

2007 Final

$

757,196,779

$

The FY 2014 budget includes an operating millage rate of 4.1193 per $1,000 of taxable value. The
adopted aggregate millage rate (operating and debt service) is 4.3263, which represents a -0.18%
decrease from the prior year adopted rate of 4.3342. The debt service millage adjusts annually
based on the property valuation and the debt service requirement. Revenue from ad valorem
taxes is projected at $97.6 million, which is approximately 34.3% of the total General Fund
revenue.
This is the seventh year in a row that we will hold the line on property taxes. In 2007, the
combined millage rate was 5.0826. The City Commission reduced the operating millage rate in FY
2008 and as a result, neighbors were better positioned to weather the difficult economic times by
paying significantly less in property taxes. The chart below represents the history of property tax
collections.
History of Property Tax Revenue

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 10 of 19

During FY 2013, the City completed a financial forecast for the General and other proprietary
funds within the City. The financial forecast model utilized data from every facet of the
organization to prepare an informed, interactive, financial forecast model for staff and the City
Commission to use as a tool for long term financial planning and ensuring a structurally balanced
budget. Property values are showing a slight uptick and building permit activities point to growth
in the taxable valuation, however, this is not sufficient for long term sustainability. This
forecasting model demonstrated the General Fund gap for today and ten years into the future.
Without additional revenues and/or extreme cuts in services, the General Fund deficit and
corresponding decrease in reserves continues, in perpetuity. The one-time revenue sources that
have been used in the last several years to close the General Fund gap have been exhausted. New
strategies must be embraced.
Fire Assessment Fee
The ability to address long-term fiscal issues and ensuring a structurally balanced budget requires
a permanent realignment of revenues and expenditures. As we focus on making difficult
decisions today, we are building a framework for fiscal sustainability for our future. In an effort to
support necessary expenditures for FY 2014 and ensure long-term sustainability, the Fire
Assessment Fee was increased by $7.50 per residential household, per month. This equates to an
annual increase of $90 per single family residential household or $86.40 if neighbors take
advantage of paying their bill in November. This increase will serve to fully fund Fire Suppression
Services, thus relieving the General Fund of this cost and allowing the City to maintain the current
level of services in other operational areas today, and in the future.
The annual increase in the Fire Assessment Fee is a prudent fiscal approach to a challenging
situation; one that we are confident will prepare us well for the new fiscal year and beyond. The
increase will generate approximately $12.3 million in additional General Fund revenue annually.
With the 100% cost recovery of fire suppression services through the Fire Assessment Fee, the FY
2014 Adopted Budget is structurally balanced and supports sound fiscal and operational policies.
It remains imperative for the City of Fort Lauderdale to continue to look further ahead than just
the next fiscal year when making budgetary decisions in order to allocate resources efficiently
and effectively and to control the cost of providing services. In addition, it is critical that the City
pay very close attention to the rising cost of current services, particularly when considering any
expansion or improvement of services in the future.
The total FY 2014 Adopted General Fund Budget is $285,145,715 as compared to the FY 2013
Adopted Budget of $267 million, which had the benefit of several one-time cost reductions such
as insurance premiums and fleet replacement costs. The charts on the following page present
major revenue sources and uses for the General Fund Budget, not including balances or reserves.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 11 of 19

Where the Money Comes From
In Millions

GENERAL FUND
$285.2 MILLION

Where the Money Goes
In Millions

GENERAL FUND
$285.1 MILLION

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 12 of 19

Water & Sewer Funds
The Water & Sewer Fund adopted expenditures are $105 million, which is $11.5 million less than
the FY 2013 Amended Budget. The budget includes $145,000 for an additional TV Truck Camera
System and $40,000 for a Resistive Load Trailer. A 5.0% rate increase will become effective
October 1, 2013 based on the City’s ordinance. The impact of the adopted rate increase on a
residential customer using 5,000 gallons of water per month amounts to a $2.47 increase, as
illustrated below:
Effect of Adopted Monthly Increase on Average Customer
(5,000 gallons/month)
5/8 inch meter
Water Charge

Old Rate New Rate
$

Sewer Charge
Total

$

Increase

18.46

19.38

0.92

30.96

32.51

1.55

49.42

51.89

2.47

It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Water & Sewer Fund will have an estimated
reserve of $31.8 million and available fund balance of $2.6 million.
The Central Regional Wastewater System Fund adopted expenditures are $22.2 million. The
wastewater rate remains the same at $1.44 per 1,000 gallons which is sufficient to support the
regional system. It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Central Regional Wastewater
System Fund will have an available reserve balance of $7.1 million.
Sanitation Fund
The Sanitation Fund adopted expenditures are $20.4 million which includes funding for cleaning
the beach, which was transferred from the General Fund this year. The Fund received some one
time payments during FY 2013 including a $1.5 million payment from Wheelabrator, $2.5 million
from the Resource Recovery Board, and a one-time payment from the Fleet Fund in the amount
of $2.4 million for vehicle replacement reserves that the Sanitation Fund will now maintain.
Sanitation rates are adopted to remain the same as FY 2013 and by the end of FY 2014 the
Sanitation Fund is estimated to have approximately $6 million in fund balance.
Self-Insured Health and Property/Casualty Funds
The Self-Insured Health Fund adopted expenditures are $19.9 million. The City managed selfinsured health programs are funded through insurance charges to employees and retirees, and
City contributions on behalf of employees. This budget includes $70,000 to increase the level of
services provided through the Employee Assistance Program and $60,000 to outsource the

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 13 of 19

administration of the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). The budget anticipates no increases in
employer premiums; however, employees will experience a slight increase in premiums. In FY
2013, a health and wellness center was opened to allow covered members free and convenient
access to health care. Through this initiative, we also anticipate a decrease in the cost of health
claims from other providers.
The Property/Casualty City Insurance Fund has adopted expenditures of $21.5 million for
FY 2014. This budget provides for the coverage of workers’ compensation, police liability,
employment practices liability, auto liability, property damage and general liability. The City
Insurance Fund maintains a reserve of 100% of the actuarially calculated liability. Due to
healthier than anticipated fund reserves, the Insurance Fund absorbed a significant portion of the
premiums in FY 2013, but will return to 100% premium collections in FY 2014.
Central Services Fund
The Central Services Fund adopted expenditures are $16.4 million, which is $177,802 more than
the FY 2013 Amended Budget. The budget includes $215,000 for the upgrade and completion of
the Kronos Payroll Timekeeping System, $190,000 for the data storage expansion and UPS backup network batteries, $161,101 for two new positions: Information Security Analyst and
Technical Support Analyst to support the development and maintenance design security policy
education and training program and to manage vehicular mobile data technology, and $17,500
for the Arc GIS On-line subscription, which provides operations enhancements to the City’s
Geographical Information System (GIS). It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Central
Services Fund will have an estimated available fund balance of $807,787.
Vehicle Rental (Fleet) Fund
Commencing in FY 2014, the Fleet Fund will no longer own or be responsible for replacement of
non-general fund vehicles and other rolling stock. Each respective proprietary fund received their
replacement reserves from the Fleet Fund in FY 2013 in order to begin their own vehicle
replacements. However, overall preventative and other maintenance of the fleet will continue to
be the responsibility of the Fleet Fund. The Fleet Fund adopted expenditures for FY 2014 are
$15.3 million, which is $13.5 million less than the FY 2013 Amended budget. This budget includes
$1 million for a adopted vehicle camera monitoring program to improve driver safety. The
Division continues to repurpose vehicles wherever possible in an effort to more appropriately
match vehicle type with the vocational needs of the department and to reduce fuel costs through
the use of energy efficient vehicles and the implementation of the no idle policy. It is anticipated
that by the end of FY 2014, the Vehicle Rental Fund will have reserves for Replacement Account
of $8.8 million, in addition to $430,000 in available fund balance.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 14 of 19

Parking System Fund
The Parking System Fund adopted expenditures are $15.7 million which includes funding of
$316,950 for various items such as implementing wireless handheld ticket writers, an additional
vehicle for enforcement operations, permit management system and meter replacements in
various locations. It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Parking System Fund will have
reserves and available fund balance of approximately $10.0 million.
Building Funds
There are three separate Building Funds with a combined adopted budget of $12.3 million. This
budget includes $1 million to digitally record records and backlog from previous years, $195,512
for three new positions: Performance Analyst, Floodplain and Energy Calculation Specialist, and a
part-time Service Clerk, and $90,000 for building improvements. The Building Funds were
established to ensure legally restricted permit revenues, certification maintenance fees and
construction technology fees to finance allowable activities related to enforcement of the Florida
Building Code. The chart represents the number of permits issued compared to the construction
value over the last five years. It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Building Funds will
have $19.4 million in reserves.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 15 of 19

Housing and Community Development Fund
In FY 2014, the City anticipates receipt of the following Federal Entitlement Funds: $1.5 million in
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), $500,000 in Home Investment Partnerships
(HOME), $113,000 in Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) and $8.3 million in Housing Opportunities
for Persons with HIV/AIDS (HOPWA) Funds. The Housing and Community Development Fund is
not supported by a General Fund subsidy.
CDBG funds provide flexibility to address quality of life issues in the communities of Fort
Lauderdale including housing, public service needs, public facility needs, and economic
development. HOME funds are used primarily to address housing assistance to eligible
homeowners, agencies, renters, and homebuyers. Assistance is issued in the form of down
payment assistance or housing rehabilitation loans. Emergency Shelter Grant funds are used for
homeless assistance and prevention primarily through assistance with rent and utility payments
and supportive services for the homeless. HOPWA provides funding for housing assistance, social
services, program planning and development costs for targeted special needs clients who are
diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. State Housing Initiative Partnership Program (SHIP) funds are used
primarily for single-family housing rehabilitation grants, down payment assistance, and utility
hook-up assistance.
Airport Fund
The Airport Fund adopted expenditures are $9.3 million, which is approximately $5 million less
than the FY 2013 Amended Budget. The budget includes $171,061 for three (3) new Airport
Maintenance Technicians and $120,000 for permanent noise monitoring terminals. It is
anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the Airport Fund will have an available fund balance of
$14.9 million.
Stormwater Fund
The Stormwater Fund adopted expenditures are $7.5 million, which is $1.4 million less than the
FY 2013 Amended Budget. The budget includes $60,000 for a compact excavator to install and
repair stormwater outfalls and pipes located in and around properties that are not accessible
with large equipment. The adopted rate of $3.95 for residential properties with three units or
less is a $0.19 increase from the FY 2013 rates. It is anticipated that by the end of FY 2014, the
Stormwater Fund will have an available fund balance of $9.1 million which will be programmed
for the improvement of the system based upon the findings of the funded studies.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 16 of 19

Community Redevelopment Agency Fund
Fort Lauderdale Beach
The Fort Lauderdale Beach area adopted expenditures are $5.5 million. Taxable value estimates
project that $6.3 million in total Tax Increment Financing (TIF) revenue is anticipated over the
next year. Staff will focus efforts on developing adopted designs for the community investment
projects identified in the Five-Year Community Investment Plan.
Northwest Progresso Flagler Heights
The Northwest Progresso Flagler Heights area adopted expenditures are $5.5 million. The budget
includes $15,000 for lighting upgrades for Durrs Neighborhood. Taxable value estimates project
that $5.2 million in total TIF revenue is anticipated.
Central City (Middle River-South Middle River-Sunrise Blvd)
Central City was formerly the Middle River- South Middle River-Sunrise Blvd district. The Central
City area does not have any adopted revenue or expenditures for FY 2014 since the taxable value
for the area was less than the base year taxable value. Because of this, no tax increment revenue
will be deposited into the redevelopment trust for this area.
Arts and Science District Garage Fund
The Arts and Science District Garage adopted expenditures are $900,000. The FY 2014 budget
includes a payment in lieu of taxes, which will credit $37,632 to the General Fund. The 950 space
parking garage is located in the Arts and Science District of the City, with the City having full and
exclusive responsibility for operation and maintenance of the garage. There is no anticipated
year-end balance in this fund.
Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund
The Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund adopted expenditures are $870,000. The Cemetery
Fund was established to manage the four City owned cemeteries and provide perpetual care for
them. The Woodlawn, Evergreen, Sunset Memorial Gardens, and Lauderdale Memorial Park
cemeteries have been owned by the City since 1917 but are operated and maintained by a
private contractor. The Fund’s resources are comprised of property sales, 19% of each
burial/cremation, and $0.20 per square inch of the base of each monument and/or bench
purchased. Funds from this trust fund can only be expended for maintenance of the cemeteries,
cost of managing the fund, and capital improvements to the cemetery system. It is anticipated
that by the end of FY 2014, the Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund will have a reserved fund
balance of $27.9 million.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 17 of 19

Community Investment Plan (CIP)
The Community Investment Plan continues to be one of my top priorities. Infrastructure,
transportation, parks, and buildings are the literal foundation of a community. The Community
Investment Plan has a unique and important responsibility to delineate what the community
needs to build now and what it will need to build in years to come. This must be done in a
strategic, careful, and impactful way to maximize economic development and improve quality of
life in line with the City Commission’s approved vision and policy. The Community Investment
Plan incorporates the concept of “sustainable infrastructure” which involves connecting a
commitment to sound asset management with an approach that prioritizes community needs
within the context of a sustainable future.
The adopted budget includes funding appropriations for specific projects for the first year and a
funding plan for the remaining years. The five-year investment plan includes ongoing projects,
new projects, and projects in progress that need additional funding. It also includes a plan for
future projects based on expected revenues, bond issuance, and other financing mechanisms.
Newly funded projects were carefully assessed and prioritized based on objective criteria and
weighting established by the City Commission in March to ensure the most pressing needs of the
community, stakeholders and neighbors are addressed. The CIP includes a $4.8 million transfer
from the General Fund into the General Capital Projects fund for some much-needed
improvements and maintenance projects. Highlights of the adopted Community Investment Plan
Fiscal Year 2014 are as follows:
 $6,004,500 for improvements to the Executive Airport supported by funding from the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Florida Department of Transportation and the Airport
Fund;
 $5,288,711 for Central Regional Plant repair and rehabilitation projects;
 $4,035,251 to fund a variety of projects within the Beach Community Redevelopment Area;
 $3,455,000 to fund Northwest Progresso Flagler Height Community Redevelopment Area
priority capital needs;
 $2,095,875 to fund citywide maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation projects;
 $1,300,000 for stormwater drainage improvements and drainage evaluation;
 $1,200,000 in additional funding for Street resurfacing;
 $890,555 for the second phase of citywide telephone system upgrades;
 $780,000 for sidewalk and paver replacements;
 $500,000 to fund priority downtown walkability projects;
 $500,000 for a document imaging management system in the Building Division;
 $424,100 in Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds to pave roads in
South Middle River;
 $433,600 in neighborhood and business improvements projects;
 $180,000 to fund improvements to the War Memorial Auditorium; and
 $100,000 for Seven Isles seawall improvements.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 18 of 19

Community investment projects are in support of our Cylinders of Excellence and are critical to
making Fort Lauderdale a great place to live, work and play.
Personnel
In today’s knowledge economy, one of the best predictors of organizational growth and vitality is
the organization’s ability to attract and retain the best talent. Cultivating and growing great
minds is essential to identifying ways to cultivate and grow our City. We are engaging our
employees at all levels of the organization and we are committed to the development of our
talent. As part of the FY 2014 Adopted Budget, I have included enhancements to our employee
training program to include a new Organizational Development and Training Coordinator position
along with new equipment and technology for our training room in Human Resources. I am also
planning enhancements to our citywide Safety Program during this coming year.
The net effect of the adopted position additions and eliminations is an increase of seven (7) fulltime positions to 2,275. This number includes eliminated positions and new position changes
through recommended budget modifications.
The adopted budget also includes required pension plan contributions, debt service for the
pension obligation bonds, a contractually obligated wage adjustment for employees in the
Teamsters and Federation of Public Employees (Professional and Supervisory Units) bargaining
units of 1% and an allowance for merit increases for all eligible employees. I have also included a
commensurate 1% wage adjustment for our non-represented employees.
Conclusion
The FY 2014 budget development process was enriched by the implementation of a Revenue
Estimating Conference Committee and a vigorous month-long review by the Budget Advisory
Board. Recommendations from both the Committee and the Board were incorporated into this
document. It is through a combination of revenue enhancements and expenditure cuts that I was
able to present to you a structurally balanced budget for Fiscal Year 2014. Seldom is there just
one solution to solving a problem and mitigating challenges. With that in mind, staff has worked
hard to create a plan and establish a foundation from which we will work towards success.
I wish to thank the Mayor and City Commission for sharing your ideas and priorities for the City
during the recent priority setting workshops so they could be reflected in the adopted budget. I
also extend my appreciation to the Department Directors and their staff for their active
participation and valuable contributions to the development of the FY 2014 budget. As a service
organization, focused on providing exceptional services to the community, the employees remain
the city’s most valuable resource.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
December 1, 2013
Page 19 of 19

In closing, I believe the FY 2014 budget is a plan that provides resources to maintain core city
services while moving forward with strategies that ensure a positive, sustainable future. I firmly
believe that this adopted budget is both responsive and responsible. It is responsive to the
service requirements of our neighbors and responsible in recognizing changes in the economic
climate and subsequent availability of resources. We eagerly anticipate the opportunity to work
with the Mayor and City Commission to implement this adopted budget.
On behalf of the employees of the City of Fort Lauderdale, we thank you for the opportunity to
serve.
Respectfully submitted,

Lee R. Feldman, ICMA-CM
City Manager

“Mind the Gap”
-Anonymous

Venice of America
THE CITY OF FORT LAUDERDALE

features the Broward Center for the Performing Arts,
Museum of Discovery and Science, Museum of Art and
Fort Lauderdale History Center.

Incorporated on March 27, 1911, the City of Fort Lauderdale is framed on the east coast of Florida by seven
miles of golden sand beaches and bordered on the west
by the Everglades. Between the two, the Intracoastal
Waterway, the New River and a canal system reminiscent of Venice winds through the interior.

Las Olas Boulevard has gained international acclaim
as Fort Lauderdale’s centerpiece of fashion, ﬁne dining
and entertainment.

Encompassing nearly 36 square miles with a population
of 168,358, Fort Lauderdale is the largest of Broward
County’s 31 municipalities and the seventh largest city in
Florida.

The City’s downtown area is home to many corporate
headquarters, government oﬃces and educational institutions, including Broward College, Florida Atlantic
University and Florida International University.

An advantageous economic climate has helped Fort
Lauderdale establish itself as an international business
center and one of the most desirable locations for new,
expanding or relocating businesses. Once known strictly
as a tourism-based economy, today, Fort Lauderdale
supports a diverse range of industries, including marine,
manufacturing, ﬁnance, real estate, high technology,
avionics, aerospace, and ﬁlm and television production.

Through the cooperative eﬀorts of residents, businesses
and local government, Fort Lauderdale has evolved into
a City that oﬀers the best of both worlds – an attractive
business environment and an outstanding quality of life.
Fort Lauderdale is a great place to live, work and raise a
family, and the City looks forward to continuing to build
upon its success to meet the challenges of the 21st
Century and beyond.

Fort Lauderdale also oﬀers an outstanding quality of life,
highlighted by a semi-tropical climate, rich natural
beauty, and an array of cultural, entertainment and educational amenities.
Blessed with over 3,000 hours of sunshine each year and
pleasant year-round ocean breezes, world-famous Fort
Lauderdale Beach oﬀers premier opportunities for recreation, relaxation and enjoyment.
The picturesque Riverwalk serves as the cornerstone of
the City’s arts, science, cultural and historic district that
i

Manager is responsible for directing the City’s day‐to‐day
operations and carrying out the policies set forth by the
Commission. Lee R. Feldman, Fort Lauderdale’s current
City Manager, began serving in June 2011.
The City of Fort Lauderdale’s reorganized structure is
comprised of the offices of the City Commission, City
Manager, City Attorney, City Auditor, City Clerk and the
following nine departments responsible for service de‐
livery: Finance, Fire‐Rescue, Human Resources, Informa‐
tion Technology Services, Parks and Recreation, Police,
Sustainable Development, Public Works and Transporta‐
tion and Mobility.
The City employs a workforce of approximately 2,457
employees. Six bargaining units represent a substantial
number of employees including: Fraternal Order of Police
(FOP), FOP Police Captains, International Association of
Fire Fighters (IAFF), International Brotherhood of Team‐
sters Local 769 and the Federation of Public Employees
(Professional and Supervisory).

OUR VISION
The City of Fort Lauderdale is committed to improving
productivity, streamlining expenses and developing a
stronger, more effective organization. The City has
embraced a vision that is based on fiscal responsibility,
accountability, high ethical standards and quality deliv‐
ery of services. It is a vision that rewards excellence, not
mediocrity, and above all, places the people of Fort Laud‐
erdale first.
As the City moves forward, it will continue to work in
partnership with its most important asset – its citizens –
to develop the strategies necessary to ensure a safe and
secure community; provide quality programs and serv‐
ices; enhance quality of life; protect the environment; pro‐
mote smart growth; and maintain fiscal responsibility.

MARINE INDUSTRY
Marine commerce is the leading industry in Greater Fort
Lauderdale and Broward County. It accounts for more
than 134,000 jobs and gross wages and earnings of $3.7
billion in Broward County, along with over 162,000 jobs
and $13.6 billion in total economic impact in South
Florida.

CITY ADMINISTRATION
The City of Fort Lauderdale has been operating under a
Commission‐Manager form of government since 1925.
The City Commission is comprised of the Mayor, who is
elected at‐large, and four Commissioners, who are elected
in non‐partisan district races. Elections occur every three
years and each elected official is eligible to serve three
consecutive three‐year terms. The next election is March
2015. As the City’s legislative body, the City Commission sets
policy, passes ordinances, adopts resolutions and makes ap‐
pointments to advisory boards and committees.

With more than 300 miles of waterways, state‐of‐the‐art
marinas and leading marine manufacturing and repair
facilities, Greater Fort Lauderdale is a world‐renowned
port of call for the yachting industry.
The City is home to the Fort Lauderdale International
Boat Show, the world’s largest boat show that generates
$500 million in economic impact each year.

The City Manager is appointed by and reports directly to
the City Commission. As Chief Executive Officer, the City
ii

TOURISM INDUSTRY
Tourism is Greater Fort Lauderdale’s second largest indus‐
try, accounting for more than 114,000 jobs. In 2012, more
than 12 million visitors selected Greater Fort Lauderdale as
their destination of choice and spent in excess of $9.8 billion.
For every 85 visitors to Broward County, it is estimated that
one job is created.

TRADE & BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
Fort Lauderdale has emerged as one of the fastest‐
growing markets for global trade with more than 40% of
local businesses engaged in or supporting international
commerce. The City remains at the forefront of South
Florida’s emerging “Internet Coast,” a region that is
home to more than 6,000 high technology firms.
Ranking Fort Lauderdale as one of the “100 Best Places
to Live and Launch a Business,” CNN/Money reported:

jobs locally and over 200,000 statewide, and is responsi‐
ble for producing $730 million in state and local taxes.

“...Fort Lauderdale has felt less impact (from the real
estate market) than the regions in and around Miami.
The hottest businesses here are a reflection of the sub‐
tropical climate and locale. Pleasure boat construction
and services are a major sector, while the tourism industry,
in general, stays strong, thanks in large part to the Cana‐
dians and Europeans attracted to the weak dollar.
What's more, a 600,000 square‐foot convention center
plays host to trade shows that bring a variety of indus‐
trial leaders from all over the country in contact with
local businesses. Besides the usual pleasures to be ex‐
pected from a city by the sea (sun, surf, sailing and swim‐
ming), Fort Lauderdale offers a lively downtown, with
museums, galleries, live music, theater and fine restau‐
rants. And for sports‐crazed fans, there are no less than
seven pro teams to root for in the surrounding area.”

Port Everglades is also one of the few ports in the coun‐
try with a trade surplus, totaling $3.6 billion in 2012.
The Port has launched an aggressive 20‐year, $2 billion
expansion. Major capital projects recently completed or
currently underway are creating 3,200 new construction jobs
and generating $239.5 million in state and local taxes.

FORT LAUDERDALE/
HOLLYWOOD INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport (FLL) is
ranked 21st in the United States and serves more than
23.5 million passengers and more U.S. cities than any
other airport in South Florida. The Airport offers the low‐
est domestic fares in South Florida and has more than
300 daily departures to more than 100 destinations in the
United States, Latin America, Canada and the Caribbean.

TRANSPORTATION
The City of Fort Lauderdale offers an extensive trans‐
portation network that includes Port Everglades, Fort
Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport (FLL), Fort
Lauderdale Executive Airport, two major railways, high‐
ways, a mass transit system, water taxis and city trolleys.

Passenger traffic at Fort Lauderdale‐Hollywood Interna‐
tional Airport is estimated to grow between 1 to 3 per‐
cent each year over the next several years.
Plans have been unveiled to spend $650 million over the
next five years to modernize and upgrade all four termi‐
nals. The airport is currently spending about $1 million a
day this year on the construction of the expanded South
Runway. The $791 million South Runway project will be
completed at the end of 2014.

PORT EVERGLADES
Port Everglades generated $26 billion worth of business
activity in 2012 and indications show continued growth
as the South Florida seaport expands its containerized
cargo berths, deepens its navigational channels and
opens an on‐port freight rail facility.

Each day, FLL averages 621 commercial flights on 30 air‐
lines with an average of 125 private flights. The total eco‐
nomic impact of airport is estimated at $2.7 billion.

Port Everglades generates big economic advantages that
flow right into our community, making it an economic
powerhouse. Annually, the Port generates nearly $26
billion in business activity statewide, supports 11,700
iii

FORT LAUDERDALE EXECUTIVE AIRPORT

form. A fully furnished lobby provides travelers with a
comfortable area to converse and conduct business,
along with access to plentiful parking and convenient
ground transportation. The Helistop is an outstanding ex‐
ample of the City of Fort Lauderdale’s progressive ap‐
proach to downtown revitalization and our commitment
to providing citizens with efficient transportation options.

Owned and operated by the City, Fort Lauderdale Exec‐
utive Airport is one of the nation’s busiest general avia‐
tion airports. Executive Airport generates more than $7
million in annual revenue with an estimated economic
impact of over $800 million. The Airport serves a wide
range of general aviation needs including corporate avi‐
ation, air charter, air ambulance services, avionics, flight
training and aircraft refurbishing.

SURFACE TRANSPORTATION
The road system in Broward County totals 4,800 miles and
includes more than 140 miles of expressways (I‐95, I‐75,
I‐595, Florida Turnpike and Sawgrass Expressway) and ap‐
proximately 375 miles of divided highways.

The Airport houses the second busiest U.S. Customs Gen‐
eral Aviation Facility and is the fifth busiest general aviation
airport in the United States with over 160,000 takeoffs and
landings per year.

The City of Fort Lauderdale is served by three bus lines and
two major freight carriers, Florida East Coast Railway and
CSX Corporation. The County‐operated bus system includes
an active fleet of 275 transit vehicles that serve almost 40
million passengers annually.

Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport also features a 200‐
acre Industrial Airpark that offers 1.5 million square feet
of prime office, warehouse and manufacturing space. Ex‐
ecutive Airport serves as the hub site for the City’s For‐
eign‐Trade Zone #241 and also manages the Downtown
Fort Lauderdale John Fuhrer Helistop. The Airport is self‐
sustaining, with operating revenue generated by land
leases and fuel flowage fees.

Tri‐Rail, a commuter rail system, provides service along a
72‐mile corridor from Miami‐Dade County to Palm Beach
County. Connecting buses are available at all stations, with
designated shuttles at Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood and
Miami International Airports and Palm Tran connections
to the Palm Beach International Airport.

FORT LAUDERDALE DOWNTOWN HELISTOP
The Downtown Fort Lauderdale John Fuhrer Helistop is
designed to accommodate intermediate category gen‐
eral aviation helicopters with a maximum takeoff weight
of 11,900 pounds and a 46‐foot rotor diameter. Used ex‐
tensively by corporate and charter operators, the state‐
of‐the art facility is situated above the City Park Mall
parking garage in the heart of Fort Lauderdale’s dynamic
downtown.

The Amtrak Silver Service links Fort Lauderdale to the
rest of the nation, including daily trips to New York.

WATER TAXI
Fort Lauderdale features a unique Water Taxi system,
which transports passengers daily to and from the
downtown area via the City’s New River and network
of inland waterways.

The Helistop features a landing area and one helicopter
parking position on a 14,500 square‐foot elevated plat‐

iv

COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE
A comprehensive network of public and private hospi‐
tals serve Fort Lauderdale. Among the area’s 24 hospitals
are nationally recognized leaders in cardiovascular medicine,
childcare, sports medicine and rehabilitation.
Greater Fort Lauderdale also offers wellness programs,
nursing homes, hospices and mental health facilities,
along with over 2,900 physicians and 25,000 nurses.
Broward General Medical Center, one of the areas lead‐
ing medical facilities, has completed a major 400,000
square foot expansion, including a new emergency de‐
partment and trauma center with rooftop helipad, criti‐
cal care units, an outpatient imaging center and more.

EDUCATION
The Broward County Public School District is the largest
fully‐accredited school district in the country. The school
district serves 236,170 students in pre‐kindergarten
through grade 12. Broward County school leaders are
building a state‐of‐the‐art infrastructure that is redefin‐
ing the scope of education.

Outdoor activities are endless, with golf courses, parks,
playgrounds, miles of coral reefs and plenty of sunshine.
Boating, scuba diving, snorkeling, fishing and recre‐
ational activities are enjoyed by residents, tourists and
business travelers.

Fort Lauderdale offers outstanding opportunities for
higher education. Campuses for Florida Atlantic University
(FAU), Florida International University (FIU) and Broward
College are located in downtown. Both FAU and FIU rank
among the nation’s top 300 universities according to U.S.
News and World Report’s Annual Survey of America’s
Best Colleges.

The area boasts professional sports teams in football,
baseball, basketball, and hockey. World‐class swimming
and diving events are hosted at the International Swim‐
ming Hall of Fame/Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
The City of Fort Lauderdale has intertwining master plans
to help protect neighborhoods by ensuring that new
developments adhere to well‐balanced guidelines.
The Downtown Master Plan protects residential neigh‐
borhoods by directing large scale, high‐rise and high

QUALITY OF LIFE
From the blue wave beaches and the exotic Everglades
to the winding waterways and chic ease of Las Olas, Fort
Lauderdale is a city comfortable with its reputation for
being a paradise. The average daily temperature is 77
degrees in the winter and 89 degrees in the summer.
v

density developments to the downtown core. The most
intensive, commercially oriented development will be
concentrated in the mixed‐use urban center.

The DDA is overseeing a downtown transportation proj‐
ect, which will include a transit plan that will provide
various options for people coming to and traveling within
the Downtown Fort Lauderdale. One of the key compo‐
nents of the project is The Wave, a 2.7 mile fixed‐rail street‐
car system that will link Downtown destinations and points
of interest to nearby parking facilities and transit options
to connect with adjacent communities. The project will
also include streetscape enhancements, landscaping,
wide sidewalks, decorative lighting and street furniture.

“Smart Growth” plans aspire to redesign areas so resi‐
dents may work, shop, learn, worship and find recreation
activities close to home.
The City is encouraging redevelopment that protects
history and builds on the unique characteristics and
distinct identities of our neighborhoods.
The master plans aim to encourage redevelopment that
is attractive, compatible with neighborhoods, pedestrian‐
friendly and transit oriented.

PROPERTY VALUES
Overall, the City of Fort Lauderdale has experienced an
increase of 4.49% in property values, which is slightly
higher than the Broward County average increase of
4.46%. According to the Broward County Property Ap‐
praiser, the assessed value of taxable property in the City
as of July 1, 2013 is estimated at $24.7 billion.

DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY (DDA)
The DDA, a special taxing district, was formed to provide
for the rehabilitation, redevelopment, and revitalization
of downtown. The DDA seeks to provide a critical link
between the economic development and physical de‐
velopment objectives of Downtown Fort Lauderdale.

vi

The CRA’s Fort Lauderdale Beach area oversees capital
improvements, redevelopment projects and business ini‐
tiatives in a 121‐acre area located in the City’s central
beach district.
In 2010, the City Commission approved the public im‐
provement portion of the Central Beach Master Plan,
which includes eight projects representing a $34 million
investment in the beach over the next eight years.
The plans aim to beautify the beach by improving land‐
scape and streetscapes, enhancing pedestrian access, up‐
grading parks, creating public gathering spaces, adding
parking, and developing retail, recreational and enter‐
tainment amenities.

FORT LAUDERDALE COMMUNITY
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY (CRA)
The CRA’s Northwest‐Progresso‐Flagler Heights area di‐
rects redevelopment activity in the district by providing
targeted infrastructure improvements, assisting the pri‐
vate sector in property development, and providing busi‐
ness assistance and economic incentives to redevelop
blighted commercial properties.
As part of the CRA initiatives, the City completed the
Sistrunk Boulevard Enhancement and Beautification Proj‐
ect designed to modernize infrastructure, stimulate pub‐
lic and private investment, and create a family‐oriented,
vibrant retail destination.
The $15 million project encompasses Sistrunk Boulevard
from Federal Highway to N.W. 24 Avenue. The project in‐
cludes reducing portions of the roadway from four lanes
to three lanes with on‐street parking; placing segments of
overhead utility lines under ground; widening sidewalks
to enhance pedestrian access and accommodate outdoor
dining; incorporating decorative lighting; median and
landscape enhancements; and new bus shelters.

Fort Lauderdale established the Central City CRA in Fiscal
Year 2012. Programming and redevelopment for future
years, when the tax increment is sufficient, will provide a
basis for economic growth and community revitalization
in this up and coming area of the City.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The City maintains proactive, professional economic
development programs to address both the attraction of
new employers and the expansion and retention needs of
existing companies. Working in conjunction with other
local, regional and state organizations, technical assistance
and support services are provided to both our current and
targeted new businesses and industries.
The City amended its Economic Development Ordinance
to promote growth for businesses of all sizes by revising
job creation requirements for financial incentives.
Strong signals are pointing to an economic recovery.
Earlier this year, occupancy at hotels in the city reached
88.4%, up 5% from 2012.

vii

Sponsorship and promotion of new, high visibility events
have been pivotal to attracting tourists, City residents
and locals from surrounding cities and communities to
downtown Fort Lauderdale and the beach.
Filming in Fort Lauderdale is at an all‐time high. Televi‐
sion, film and entertainment production projects have
poured nearly $430 million into the local economy since
2011. During the past year, the popular TV show "The
Glades" was filmed in Fort Lauderdale along with nu‐
merous Telemundo Serial productions. These and other
film productions bring hundreds of jobs and stimulate our
local economy through direct and indirect spending.

FIRE-RESCUE BOND
Saving lives and property requires vital Fire‐Rescue
infrastructure. The City of Fort Lauderdale Fire‐Rescue
bond program is providing up to $40 million to build, ren‐
ovate and upgrade 10 Fire‐Rescue stations throughout
the City to ensure the safety and protection of our citi‐
zens today and in the future.
The new stations enhance Fire‐Rescue coverage, reduce
response time and help the department maintain
outstanding levels of service. The hurricane‐resistant
facilities provide expanded space and improved security.
Residents will benefit from new medical examination
and community rooms. Three new fire‐rescue stations
opened during the past year.

viii

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 1

Visioning

Strategic Plan

Action Plan

Budget/CIP Plan

Estimating
Conference
Appointment

Estimating
Conference
Appointment

D
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Review of
Fiscal
Capacity
Study (cont.)

C
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Review of
Fiscal
Capacity
Study

Revenue
Estimating Conference

Environmental Scan
(Financial)

Budget
Planning/
Calendar

Yes

Adoption
?

Visioning
Statement

10

Review of
Financial
Forecast

E
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Tax &
Fee Rates
CIP Weighting
Consensus

Financial
Forecast

19
Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

11

15b

21
City Manager
Budget
& CIP
Review Meetings

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

June

Departmental Presentations

August

Stakeholders
Input

Neighbor
Outcomes

Budget/CIP

Action Plan

Strategic Plan

Information
Analysis

&LW\RI)RUW/DXGHUGDOH·V
6WUDWHJLF3ODQQLQJ
3URFHVV

Proposed
Budget &
CIP to BAB

G
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Budget
Review

Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

Budget
Review

H
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

24
Proposed
Budget & CIP
To
City
Commission

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Fund Summaries
Budget & CIP
Review

22
Preliminary
Budget
to
City
Commission

Proposed
Strategic
Plan

12

July

Boards

City
Commission

Neighbors

City
Staff

Budget
Review

I
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Approve
?
Yes

First Public
Hearing to Set
Tentative
Millage &
Budget
No

25
City
Commission
Meeting

No

Adopted
Budget,
CIP &
Strategic
Plan

27

Yes

Approve
?

Second Public
Hearing
& Adoption of
Budget

26
City
Commission
Meeting

Communication

Preparation

Document

Decision

Task/Process

6KDSHV/HJHQG

September
&RORU/HJHQG

Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Development/Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

23
City Commission
Budget Workshops

F
Budget Advisory Board
Budget & CIP Review

Environmental Scan
(Legislative)

20
Strategic
Budget
Kickoff &
Preparation

Prioritization
?

Action
Plans

Neighbor Forums

May

Neighbor Forums

14
City
Commission
Workshop

Preliminary
Strategic
Plan

CAAP
Development

18
Team Review of
CIP Project Applications

16

A
Budget
Advisory
Board Meeting

No

April
3
City
Commission
Meeting

9
Align Strategic
Plan with
Vision
Statement
& Strategic
Priorities

March

17
Base Budget/
Community Investment Plan (CIP)
Development

Presentation
of Survey
Results

8
City
Commission
Meeting

February

15

B
Audit
Advisory
Board

13
Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

5
Neighbor
Annual Survey

Environmental Scan
(Strategic)

Draft Strategic Plan
Preparation

7
All
Team
Planning
Session

Visioning Analysis & Writing

2
Visioning Committee

January

6

December

4

1
Neighbor
(Visioning) Summit

November

STRATEGIC PLANNING AND BUDGETING CYCLE

C I T Y OF F ORT L AU DE R D A L E

2 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 3

Budget Overview
The City’s structure includes five Charter
offices: City Attorney, City Auditor, City Clerk,
City Commission, and City Manager. There are
also nine (9) operational departments: Finance,
Fire-Rescue, Human Resources, Information
Technology Services, Parks and Recreation,
Police, Public Works, Sustainable Development
and Transportation and Mobility.
The adopted budget is the result of efforts by
the Mayor and City Commissioners as well as
City staff to allocate limited resources to best
serve the needs of the City of Fort Lauderdale.
The Budget, therefore, reflects the policies
adopted by the City Commission in response to
the needs and concerns communicated to
them by the neighbors of Fort Lauderdale.

City is structured for efficient and effective
work. In addition, a two-year comparison and
analysis of staffing is included.
Financial Plan
As a financial plan, the adopted budget outlines
the City’s fiscal resources. This document
displays projected revenue and expenditures
for all operating funds. A five-year financial
analysis is provided for the major revenue and
expense categories.

The FY 2014 Adopted Budget for the City of
Fort Lauderdale, Florida was developed using a
modified Program/Performance model. This
model enhances the quality of decision-making
and provides a vehicle to measure the City’s
efficiency and effectiveness rate of service
delivery. The budget is intended to serve four
primary
purposes:
Policy
Document,
Operations Guide, Financial Plan, and
Communications Device.
Communications Device
Policy Document
As a policy document, the adopted budget was
developed within the framework of the City’s
goals,
strategic
priorities,
Community
Investment Plan, financial and budgetary
policies. The information contained in this
document allows policy makers an opportunity
to review policies that address long-term goals
for sustainability of the City and its services.
Operations Guide
As an operations guide, the adopted budget
describes programs, services, and functions
performed by each department. Departmental
goals, objectives, and performance indicators
are provided for each program. An
organizational chart is provided to show the

4 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

The budget is designed to clearly communicate
information by using narratives, tables and
graphs to summarize data for the reader. The
document describes the budget process for
developing, reviewing, adopting, and amending
the budget. The Appendix section provides a
glossary and list of acronyms to enhance reader
understandability. This document can be
accessed
through
the
Internet
at
http://www.fortlauderdale.gov. Should you
have any questions about the City’s adopted
budget, please feel free to call the Budget/CIP
and Grants Division at (954) 828-5425.

Budget Development Process
The budget process is guided by direction from
the City Commission as it strives to meet the
needs of the community at a reasonable price.
Every City Commission meeting involves
deliberation about what services the City
should provide, at what level, and at what
price.
The decisions made by the City
Commission throughout the year provide a
general path for budget deliberations to follow.
City employees provide the perspective of
professionals as to the most efficient and
effective way to implement Commission policy.
Neighbors have the opportunity to express
their preferences for City services and funding
mechanisms through formal budget public
hearings as well as at individual City
Commission meetings during the year.
The budget process is comprised of five stages:
forecast, request, review, adoption, and
monitoring. These steps often overlap one
another because the City is always operating in
one fiscal year while developing the next.
Forecast stage - This is the beginning step in
the development of the next year’s budget.
The City Commission will set initial priorities
and provide guidance for the process. Budget
staff will prepare payroll projections, revenue
and expenses worksheets, and additional
supplemental data. This stage is overlapped
with the development of the Community
Investment Plan.
Request stage - This stage commences after
departmental staff receive guidance and
training. Departmental staff will begin
developing their revenue and expenditures
budgets based upon City Commission priorities,
needs of the community, financial trends, and
projections. Staff will input the projected
budgetary data into the budget preparation
module and complete budget forms that
complement the budgetary data. Departments
will have an opportunity at this stage to

request additional resources or departmental
reorganization at this time.
Review stage - This stage provides for the
evaluation of departmental budget request
submittals. Budget staff will review and
conduct an analysis at the most detailed level
of a department’s revenues and expenses.
During this stage, City Management will meet
individually with each department to review
their budget requests and to better understand
their priorities. During the months of May and
June, the management team will meet
frequently to discuss the decisions necessary to
prepare an adopted, balanced budget.
Proposed Budget stage - In July, the City
Manager will present the proposed budget to
the City Commission per City Charter
requirements. At this step in the development
of the budget, the City Commission must set a
maximum millage rate that will be provided to
the Broward County Property Appraiser for
inclusion as a preliminary millage in the Staterequired “Truth in Millage” (TRIM) notice sent
to all property owners.
Adoption stage - The City Commission typically
holds two public hearings to tentatively adopt
the millage and the budget.
Monitoring (Review/Preview) stage - This
occurs year round. In October, the adopted
budget and authorized positions are loaded
into the financial system. Throughout the fiscal
year, departmental and Budget staff review
purchases and personnel requisitions, access
financial information on-line, and monitor City
Commission agendas for financial impacts.
Monthly financial reports are prepared and
distributed to the City Commission and
departmental staff. The Budget Staff will meet
with departmental Budget Coordinators on a
quarterly basis to review what has occurred
during the last quarter and discuss the
upcoming concerns or issues for the next
quarter or upcoming budget process.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 5

Budget Calendar
January
 Receive budgetary guidance from City Commission
and Community Building Leadership Team
 Prepare training documents used for budget
development
 Finalize budget process
 Begin/complete interim reviews with each
department and discuss reorganization and
temporary positions
February
 Budget kickoff occurs with all forms and spending
guidelines distributed
 CIP Kickoff and training
March
 Departments prepare budget and CIP requests
April
 Budget Office provides budget preparation
assistance to the departments
 Departments submit budget requests
May
 Budget Office and City Management formal budget
review with departments
 Budget Advisory Board review with departments
June
 Broward County Property Appraiser provides
preliminary property valuation
 Community Building Leadership Team receives
update of budget development

July
 Broward County Property Appraiser certifies
the property tax roll on July 1
 Completion of budget balancing
 City Manager presents the proposed budget,
Community Investment Plan and five-year
financial forecast to the City Commission
 City Commission adopts a proposed millage
to be advertised in the Truth in Millage
(TRIM) notice
August
 Certification of Proposed Millage and non-ad
valorem fees to the Property Appraiser
 Property Appraiser distributes TRIM notices
to all property owners
 Prepare for public hearings
September
 City Commission holds 1st and 2nd public
hearings to adopt the millage and budget
 Certification of the Non Ad valorem
Assessments to the Property Appraiser
 Certification of the final millage with the
Property Appraiser and State of Florida
Department of Revenue within 3 days of
final adoption
October
 Beginning of new Fiscal Year
 Prepare Truth in Millage (TRIM) compliance
packet for Florida Department of Revenue
 Comply with GFOA requirements for
submission for the budget awards program
November
 Prepare Adopted Budget Document
December
 Publish Budget Document

6 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Budgetary Basis
The budget is adopted on a basis consistent
with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP) with the following exceptions:





Advances from other funds are presented
as revenues.
Encumbrances, advances to other funds,
and principal on long-term debt of
governmental funds are presented as
expenditures or expenses.
Depreciation and compensated absences
are not budgeted in any funds.

The basis of accounting for governmental funds
is modified accrual. Under the modified
accrual basis, revenues are recognized when
they become susceptible to accrual, i.e.,
measurable and available to finance the City’s
operations. Available means collectible within
the current period or soon enough thereafter
to be used to pay liabilities of the current
period.
Expenditures (decreases in net financial
resources) are recognized in the accounting
period in which the related fund liabilities are
incurred as long as it is measurable. An
exception to this is long-term debt and the
long-term
portion
of
accumulated
compensated absences and longevity pay,
which are recognized when due. Budgetary
expenditures include expenditures adjusted for
encumbrances at fiscal year-end and principal
on long-term debt.
In applying the susceptible to accrual concept
to intergovernmental revenues, the legal and
contractual requirements of the numerous
individual programs are used as a guide. There
are, however, essentially two types of these
revenues. In one, monies must be expended
on the specific purpose or project before any
amounts will be paid to the City; therefore,

revenues are recognized based upon the
expenditures recorded. In the other, monies
are virtually unrestricted as to purpose of
expenditure and are usually revocable only for
failure to comply with prescribed compliance
requirements. The resources are reflected as
revenues at the time of receipt or earlier if
susceptible to accrual.
The major utility taxes and franchise fees are
recorded as revenues when earned. Licenses
and permits, fines and forfeitures, charges for
services, and other revenues (except
investment earnings) are recorded as revenues
when received in cash because they are
generally not measurable until actually
received. Property taxes are recorded as
revenues in the fiscal year levied, provided they
are collected in the current period or within
sixty days thereafter.
Those remaining
uncollected are recorded as deferred revenues.
Investment income is recorded as revenue
when earned.
Special assessments are
recorded as revenues only to the extent that
individual
installments
are
considered
available.
The accrual basis of accounting is utilized by
proprietary
funds
and
pension
and
nonexpendable trust funds. Under the accrual
basis, revenues are recognized in the
accounting period in which they are earned, if
objectively measurable, whether collected
sooner or later. Expenses, not expenditures,
are recognized when the benefits of costs
incurred are deemed to have been consumed
or expired. Long-term liabilities are accounted
for through those funds. Depreciation of fixed
assets (including capital outlay equipment
purchased in the operating budget) is recorded
in the accounts of these funds as well on the
straight-line basis over the following useful
lives: buildings (40-50 years), improvements
(20-50 years), and equipment (3-15 years).

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 7

Property Tax Millage Summary
Operating
Millage

Debt Service
Millage

Total
Millage

4.1193
3.9544
4.1193
4.2%

0.2149
0.2062
0.2070
0.4%

4.3342
4.1606
4.3263
4.0%

FY 2013 Adopted Millage
FY 2014 Rolled Back Millage Rate
FY 2014 Adopted Millage
% Increase over Rolled Back Rate

FY 2014 Value of 1 Mill

Property Taxes at 4.1193

Gross Revenue

Net Revenue
(95%)

Value of Home

With $50,000
Homestead Exemption

No Homestead
Exemption

1.00

$24,672,804

$23,439,164

$300,000

$1,030

$1,236

0.75

$18,504,603

$17,579,373

$275,000

$927

$1,133

0.50

$12,336,402

$11,719,582

$250,000

$824

$1,030

0.40

$9,869,122

$9,375,666

$225,000

$721

$927

0.30

$7,401,841

$7,031,749

$200,000

$618

$824

0.25

$6,168,201

$5,859,791

$175,000

$515

$721

0.15

$3,700,921

$3,515,875

$150,000

$412

$618

0.10

$2,467,280

$2,343,916

$125,000

$309

$515

Mills

10 Year Millage, Taxable Value, and Revenue History
Tax Rate/
Fiscal Year Millage

Taxable Values

Actual Property
% Change in
Tax Revenue* Budgeted Revenue

2005
5.4066
$20,191,258,059
$104,187,847
2006
5.0924
$23,768,481,734
$115,680,020
2007
4.8066
$28,333,655,642
$129,987,948
2008
4.1193
$31,373,067,889
$123,089,169
2009
4.1193
$30,562,403,124
$123,026,111
2010
4.1193
$27,735,780,869
$107,296,225
2011
4.1193
$24,691,085,040
$95,599,466
2012
4.1193
$23,619,153,693
$92,412,844
2013
4.1193
$23,752,535,790
$96,726,361
2014
4.1193
$24,672,804,316
$97,569,296
*FY 2014 represents budgeted property tax revenue

8 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

23.38%
11.03%
12.37%
-5.31%
-0.05%
-12.79%
-10.90%
-3.33%
4.67%
0.87%

Department Highlights
Highlights of requested funding for programs,
one-time expenses, or other operational
increases for the FY 2014 Adopted Budget are
outlined below.

Police – The adopted budget includes $1
million for citywide security cameras and
implementation of public safety strategies,
$700,000 for laptop replacement in police
vehicles, $304,000 for part-time salaries for
teletype services.

Fire-Rescue – The adopted budget includes
$83,200 for transitional costs related to E911
dispatch transference to Broward County and
$20,000 for the CPSE Fire Accreditation.
Human Resources – The adopted budget
includes $84,506 for a new Organizational
Development and Training Coordinator
position, $70,000 for an enhanced Employee
Assistance Program, $60,000 for an
outsourced Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
Administrator, and $30,000 for technological
enhancements.
Information Technology Services (ITS) – The
adopted budget includes $215,000 for the
upgrade of the Kronos payroll timekeeping
system, $190,000 for the data storage and
UPS expansion, $196,329 for two new
positions: Information Security Analyst and
Mobile Data Technology Administrator, and
$17,500 for the Arc GIS online subscription.
Parks and Recreation – The adopted budget
includes
$720,000
for
landscape
maintenance, entranceways and signage,
$420,000 for two additional recycling trucks,
$100,000 for animal carcass removal, $32,295
for a new Part-time Homeless Coordinator,
and $20,000 for lighting upgrades to the
North Beach Village Neighborhood.

Public Works – The adopted budget includes
outsourcing of architectural services in the
Engineering Division and the addition of a
new QA/QC team made up of four new
positions: Senior Project Manager, (2) Project
Manager IIs, and an Administrative Assistant
II to audit projects. The budget also includes
$1 million for a vehicle camera and driver
safety program, which will reinforce positive
driving actions, $185,000 for TV Truck camera
system
and
resistive
load
trailer
replacements, $60,000 for a Compact
Excavator truck, $90,000 for one new Project
Manager to manage projects for the
Transportation and Mobility Department,
$45,100 for annual maintenance and licenses
for the Florida East Coast Railway and
$25,000 for a box truck to store and transport
supplies and equipment for special events.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 9

Department Highlights
Sustainable Development – The adopted
budget includes $1 million for digital imaging
of records, $397,615 for ordinance updates of
various master plans, $249,449 for four new
positions: Floodplain and Energy Calculation
Specialist,
Performance
Analyst,
Administrative Aide, and a part-time Service
Clerk, $90,000 for building improvements to
the Sustainable Development Center, and
$15,000 for lighting upgrades to the Durrs
Neighborhood. The budget also includes the
elimination of the Economic Business
Development Manager position for a savings
of $114,674.

Transportation and Mobility – The adopted
budget includes $100,000 in traffic studies,
which will be offset by revenue for a net
impact of zero to the budget, $500,000 for
the Downtown Walkability Plan, $200,000 for
replacement of twenty multi-space meters,
$175,000 for four permanent noise
monitoring terminals and upgrades to the
permit management system, $171,061 for
three Airport Maintenance Technicians, and

10 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

$12,263 for a conversion of a part-time
Accounting Clerk from temporary to regular
status. The budget also includes additional
revenue by funding a new Parking
Enforcement Specialist. This position will
generate revenue for the department.
Other General Government – The adopted
budget includes funding for celebratory
events, including $20,000 for the St. Patrick’s
Day, $20,000 for the annual Riverwalk Holiday
Lighting event, and $10,000 for the
Winterfest Boat Parade. Funding for nonprofit organizations include: $160,000 for the
Summer Youth Employment Program,
$70,000 for the Sistrunk Historical Festival
Committee, $46,568 for Aging & Disability
Resources Center of Broward County, $41,249
for Family Central, $20,000 for 2-1-1 Broward
- First Call for Help, and $19,000 for Greater
Fort Lauderdale Sister Cities International Inc.

Winterfest Boat Parade

City of Fort Lauderdale Staffing Levels
Fiscal Year 2013 Adopted

Fiscal Year 2014 Adopted

GENERAL FUND:
City Attorney
City Auditor
City Clerk
City Commission
City Manager
Finance
Fire‐Rescue
Human Resources 
Parks & Recreation
Police
Public Works
Sustainable Development 
Transportation & Mobility
  General Fund Total

Regular
Full‐Time

Regular
Part‐Time

Seasonal
Part‐Time

Temporary
Positions

Total
FTE

Regular
Full‐Time

Regular
Part‐Time

Seasonal
Part‐Time

Temporary
Full‐Time

Total
FTE

        25.0
           5.0
           5.0
        12.0
        30.0
        58.0
      450.0
        19.0
      235.0
      642.0
        53.0
        54.0
           6.0
   1,594.0

               ‐
               ‐
             2.4
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
           10.0
               ‐
           67.8
           12.0
               ‐
             1.5
               ‐
           93.7

              ‐
              ‐
              ‐
              ‐
              ‐
            0.4
            1.1
              ‐
         49.0
              ‐
              ‐
              ‐
              ‐
         50.5

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
           3.0
             ‐
             ‐
           1.0
           1.0
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
           5.0

       25.0
         5.0
         7.4
       12.0
       33.0
       58.4
     461.1
       20.0
     352.8
     654.0
       53.0
       55.5
         6.0
 1,743.2

       25.0
         5.0
         5.0
       12.0
       31.0
       58.0
     437.0
       19.0
     217.0
     651.0
       39.0
       59.0
         7.0
 1,565.0

               ‐
               ‐
             2.4
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
           10.3
               ‐
           70.0
           16.3
               ‐
             2.4
             1.5
        102.9

               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
             0.2
             2.1
               ‐
          58.1
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
          60.4

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
           3.0
             ‐
             ‐
           2.0
           1.0
             ‐
             ‐
           1.0
             ‐
           7.0

       25.0
         5.0
         7.4
       12.0
       34.0
       58.2
     449.4
       21.0
     346.1
     667.3
       39.0
       62.4
         8.5
 1,735.3

Community Redevelopment Fund:
Sustainable Development 
Community Redevelopment Fund Total

           9.0                ‐
           9.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         9.0
         9.0

         8.0                ‐
         8.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         8.0
         8.0

Grants Funds:
Sustainable Development 
Police
Grants Funds Totals

        11.0                ‐
        19.0                ‐
        30.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐
              ‐

           1.0
             ‐
           1.0

       12.0
       19.0
       31.0

       11.0                ‐
       15.0                ‐
       26.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐
               ‐

           1.0
             ‐
           1.0

       12.0
       15.0
       27.0

Building Permit Fund:
Sustainable Development
Building Permit Fund Total

        54.0                ‐
        54.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       54.0
       54.0

       57.0              0.7                ‐
       57.0              0.7                ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       57.7
       57.7

        63.0                ‐
           8.0                ‐
        71.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐

       63.0
         8.0
       71.0

       78.0                ‐
         9.0                ‐
       87.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐

       78.0
         9.0
       87.0

      287.0                ‐
      287.0                ‐
 

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

     287.0
     287.0

     298.0                ‐
     298.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

           1.0
           1.0

     299.0
     299.0

        35.0                ‐
        35.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       35.0
       35.0

       35.0                ‐
       35.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       35.0
       35.0

        66.0              9.4
        66.0              9.4

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       75.4
       75.4

       67.0            11.1                ‐
       67.0            11.1                ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       78.1
       78.1

        17.0              1.0
        17.0              1.0

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       18.0
       18.0

       19.0              0.8                ‐
       19.0              0.8                ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       19.8
       19.8

Stormwater Fund Total

        24.0                ‐
        24.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       24.0
       24.0

       28.0                ‐
       28.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       28.0
       28.0

City Insurance Funds:
Human Resources
City Insurance Funds Totals

        12.0                ‐
        12.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       12.0
       12.0

       12.0                ‐
       12.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       12.0
       12.0

Central Service Fund:
Information Technology Services
Central Service Fund Total

        59.0              4.1
        59.0              4.1

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       63.1
       63.1

       61.0              4.7                ‐
       61.0              4.7                ‐

             ‐
             ‐

       65.7
       65.7

Vehicle Rental Fund (Fleet):
Public Works
Vehicle Rental Fund Total

           4.0                ‐
           4.0                ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         4.0
         4.0

         3.0                ‐
         3.0                ‐

               ‐
               ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         3.0
         3.0

Arts & Science Garage District Fund:
Transportation & Mobility
Arts & Science Garage District Fund Total

             ‐
             ‐

              ‐
              ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         1.5
         1.5

           ‐
           ‐

             1.6                ‐
             1.6                ‐

             ‐
             ‐

         1.6
         1.6

         50.5

          6.0

 2,428.2

 2,266.0         121.8           60.4

          9.0

 2,457.2

Sanitation Fund:
Parks & Recreation
Public Works
Sanitation Fund Total
Water & Sewer Fund:
Public Works
Water & Sewer Fund Total
 
Central Region Fund:
Public Works
Central Region Fund Total
Parking Fund:
Transportation & Mobility
Parking Fund Total
Airport Fund:
Transportation & Mobility
Airport Fund Total
Stormwater Fund: 
Public Works

ALL FUNDS TOTALS

             1.5
             1.5

   2,262.0         109.7

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 11

Changes to the Personnel Complement Since FY 2013
City Manager +1 Full Time Positions
Chief Services Officer

1

Fire‐Rescue ‐13 Full Time Positions
Communications Specialist

-8

Fire-Rescue Communications Coordinator

Communications Specialist Trainee

-2

Paramedic Firefighter

-1
4

Firefighter

-4

Public Safety Telecommunication I

-2

Chief Services Officer

-1

Senior Management Fellow*

1

Organization Development & Training Coordinator*

1

Human Resources +1 Full Time Positions
Information Technology Services +2 Full Time Positions
Assistant Database Administrator

1

Planner II

-2

Chief Information Security Officer

1

Process Control Engineer

-1

Geographic Information Systems Analyst

2

Senior Technology Support Analyst

1

Information Security Analyst*

1

Senior Technology Strategist

-1

Mobile Data Technology Administrator*

1

Technical Support Analyst

-1

Parks & Recreation ‐3 Full Time Positions
Apprentice Municipal Maintenance Worker

-4

Master Swim Coach

-1

Assistant Parks & Recreation Director

-1

Municipal Maintenance Worker II

-16
-10

Deputy Director

1

Municipal Maintenance Worker III

Fabricator-Welder

-1

Municipal Operations Supervisor

-1

Field Operations Technician (Level I)

14

Park Ranger Supervisor

-1

Field Operations Technician (Level II)

4

Parks Supervisor

1

Field Operations Technician (Level III)

8

Pest Control Technician

-1

Field Operations Technician (Level IV)

9

Pool Equipment Mechanic

-1

Head Grounds Keeper

-1

Recreation Programmer II

2

Irrigation Repairperson

-3

Swimming Team Director Head Coach

-1

Police +5 Full Time Positions
Clerk Typist II

-3

Police Lieutenant

1

Crime Scene Investigator

1

Police Officer

6

Police Sergeant

1

Police Officer (K-9)

1

Police Captain

-1

Victim Advocate

-1

Accounting Clerk

-1

Fabricator-Welder

-1

Administrative Tech Service Manager

-1

Field Operations Technician (Level III)

1

Administrative Aide

1

Fleet Manager

-1

Administrative Assistant II*

1

Land Development Manager

-1
-1

Public Works +2 Full Time Positions

Administrative Assistant II

1

Municipal Maintenance Worker I

Airport Engineer

1

Municipal Maintenance Worker II

1

Architect

-3

Project Manager*

1

Architectural Assistant

-3

Project Manager II*

4

Assistant Public Works Director

3

Senior Management Fellow*

1

Chief Architect

-1

Senior Project Manager*

2

Construction Worker III

2

Senior Project Manager

1

Deputy Director

-2

Survey/CADD Coordinator

1

Electro Technician

-1

Utilities Serviceworker

-1
-1

Engineer

-1

Utility Field Representative

Engineering Assistant

-1

Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator I

1

Engineering Inspection Supervisor

1

Water Treatment Plant Operator I

2

Engineering Records Technician

1

Water Treatment Plan Operator Trainee

-2

Engineering Technician II

-1

Word Processing Secretary

-1

12 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Changes to the Personnel Complement Since FY 2013
Sustainable Development +8 Full Time Positions
Administrative Aide*
Administrative Assistant I
Administrative Assistant II
Building Inspector
Building Inspector I
Clerk III
Clerk III*

1
1
1
-3
3
-1
1

Floodplain & Energy Calculation Specialist*
Land Development Manager
Performance Analyst*
Planner I
Planner III
Principal Planner*
Project Engineer

1
1
1
1
-1
1
1

Economic & Business Development Manager

-1

CRA Project Manager

-1

Engineer

1

Senior Management Fellow*

1

Accounting Clerk*

1

Parking Enforcement Specialist*

1

Administrative Aide*

Planner III

Airport Engineer

1
-1

Principal Planner

-1
1

Airport Maintenance Technician*

3

Project Engineer

-1

Transportation Mobility  +4 Full Time Positions

Airport Manager

-1

Secretary I

-1

Customer Service Representative I

-1

Senior Accounting Clerk

1

Deputy Director

1

Senior Customer Service Representative

1

*New Positions added in FY 2014

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 13

14 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget
Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale, Our City Our Vision 2035 is a Vision Plan, the heart of which is our Vision
Statement. Our Vision Statement is an inspirational view of the future and what our community wants to
become. It is a fusion of the collective values and aspirations that have been expressed by a diverse crosssection of our neighbors over the past two-and-a half years through the citywide initiative. Six themes
make up the community vision.

FORT LAUDERDALE’S 2035
COMMUNITY VISION STATEMENT
We are connected.
We move seamlessly and easily through a safe transportation
system where the pedestrian is first.

We are ready.
We are a resilient and safe coastal community.

We are community.
We are a neighborhood of neighborhoods.

We are here.
We are an urban center and a vacationland in the heart of
South Florida.

We are prosperous.
We are a subtropical City, an urban laboratory for education
and business.

We are united.
We are a strong and vibrant kaleidoscope of multi-generational
cultures, ethnicities, and community partners.

We are Fort Lauderdale, a community of choice.
We are the City you never want to leave.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 15

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget

fast forward

fort lauderdale

Our City, Our Vision 2035
As much as big ideas are the inspiration of Fast Forward
Fort Lauderdale 2035, action is essential. The City of
Fort Lauderdale is making great strides implementing
an innovative, results-focused government culture.
We use a robust strategy management system
to connect planning, budgeting, measuring and
improving. Press Play Fort Lauderdale 2018 connects
the dots between the community’s long-term vision
to its day-to-day operations. A notable 42% of the
1,562 Vision ideas are incorporated in Press Play Fort
Lauderdale 2018, through 12 goals, 38 objectives, 191
initiatives and 142 performance indicators

Vision and strategic plan:
Connecting the dots
2035 vision

strategic plan
commission annual
action plan
fiscal year
budget

other key
plans and tools
community
investment plan

department
scorecards

PLANNING
Fort Lauderdale celebrated its Centennial in 2011.
As the City reflected on its first century, leaders
recognized a need for a unified vision for the next 100
years. The City Commission embarked on a journey
to engage the entire City in the development of a
vision that reflected the viewpoints of all stakeholders
and could guide future policy and decision-making.
Led by a City Commission appointed Visioning
Committee, the City Manager’s Office was charged
with carrying out diverse engagement mechanisms
that included: Stakeholder Interviews, Open House
Meetings, Telephone Town Hall Meetings, neighborled Meetings-in-a-Box, a dynamic web based social
ideation site ourvisionftl.com, a subject-matter
expert Big Ideas event, and a Neighbor Summit. The
Vision to be “The City You Never Want to Leave”
was unanimously recommended by the Visioning
Committee and adopted by the City Commission
on April 16, 2013. The Strategic Plan, Press Play
Fort Lauderdale 2018, is the main vehicle for
accomplishing the goals set forth in Fast Forward

16 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fort Lauderdale 2035. While the Vision establishes
the shared direction of the City, the Strategic Plan will
establish how we get there. It is organized through
five Cylinders of Excellence: Infrastructure, Public
Places, Neighbor-hood Enhancement, Business
Development, and Public Safety; along with the
Internal Support Platform. Strategic interdepartmental
teams work to further our City’s mission: We Build
Community. Each Cylinder of Excellence contains
two aspirational goals, objectives, initiatives, and
performance indicators with five-year targets. These
items comprise each team’s five-year plan to move
the City closer to achieving the Vision: “The City
You Never Want to Leave.” The Cylinder teams also
reference previously adopted City plans that are
critical to accomplishing our strategic goals. Partners
for the Strategic Plan include: City departments,
Advisory Boards and Committees, civic groups, and
local, regional and national agencies. In the shorter
term, Cylinder teams will focus on the Commission
Annual Action Plan (CAAP), a one-year work plan
with specific actions and objectives that reflect City
Commission priorities in alignment with the Vision,
the Strategic Plan, and the Neighbor Survey. The
CAAP is a product of collaboration and prioritization
by the City Commission, the City Manager’s Office,
and Department Directors. It highlights initiatives of
significant importance to the City Commission for
the upcoming fiscal year, as well as ensuring that the
organization is agile and prompt in its response to an
ever-changing environment.
BUDGETING
The Annual Operating Budget is our opportunity to
prioritize City resources. Funding should be allocated
in alignment with the Vision, Strategic Plan, and
Commission Annual Action Plan. While we may
not be able to fund all priorities in the upcoming
fiscal year, we can make strategic investments in
our future. Leveraging community partnerships
and seizing grant opportunities will help our dollars
stretch and maximize results. The budget process also
integrates the strategic alignment of departments.
Each department identifies major initiatives and
performance targets; helping decision makers allocate
resources for specific service level results. The five-year
Community Investment Plan (CIP) includes ongoing
projects, new projects, and projects in progress that
require additional funding. The CIP also includes a
plan for future projects based on expected revenues,
bond issuance, and other financing mechanisms.
CIP projects are carefully assessed and prioritized by
objective criteria and weighting established by the

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget
Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale 2035

community vision
Aspirational future

We Build Community

Mission

Why we are here
Respect, Integrity, Courage, Teamwork,
Service, Creativity, Accountability

values

How we behave and treat
neighbors and each other

Press Play Fort Lauderdale 2018

STRATEGIC PLAN

Roadmap to
achieving the vision
Commission Annual Action Plan

WORK PLAN

Commission-prioritized initiatives

REVISE

CYLINDERS OF
EXCELLENCE

IMPROVE

What kind of city do we
want to be?

MEASURE

How will we get there?

LEAN & SIX SIGMA
VISION, CYLINDER, &
DEPT SCORECARDS

GOALS

CYLINDER AND
STAT MEETINGS
NEIGHBOR SURVEY

OBJECTIVES

How are we doing?

WE
WEBUILD
BUILDCOMMUNITY
COMMUNIT

WE
WEBUILD
BUILDCOMMUNITY
COMMUNITY

WE BUILD COMMUNITY

INITIATIVES

Key actions to get us there

ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET
MULTI-YEAR COMMUNITY
INVESTMENT PLAN

City Commission to ensure the most pressing needs
of the community, stakeholders, and neighbors are
addressed. Additionally, CIP projects support both
the Cylinders of Excellence and the 2035 Community
Vision. To remain a vibrant community, we must
continually invest in our public infrastructure, which
in-turn, creates “place” unique and well-planned
improvements that enhance quality of life. This
is possible through the proper management and
strategic funding of the CIP.
MEASURING AND IMPROVING
At a staff level, Fort Lauderdale uses FL2STAT (FL2 for Fort Lauderdale, Florida) to measure, analyze,
improve, and most importantly, make progress. A
connected system of scorecards links the initiatives
and performance indicators defined in the Vision
Plan, Strategic Plan, Commission Annual Action Plan,
Department Budgets, and Process Improvements.
Progress is examined and challenges are addressed
through routine Cylinder meetings and a monthly
‘all hands on deck’ FL2STAT meeting. The Community
Investment Plan and Grants Management are

similarly addressed through a monthly CIP-STAT
meeting. A Process Improvement Plan (PIP) based
in Lean/Six Sigma methodology is a step-by-step
approach to systematically assessing, improving,
and managing key processes. Feedback is crucial for
continuous improvement, both from a listening and
sharing perspective. An annual Neighbor Survey
provides information about perceptions ranging from
City service delivery to quality of life. In addition,
feedback is gathered throughout the year, through
direct employee interaction with neighbors. As we
continue to administer the annual survey, results will
alert us where to focus our attention and resources,
while also validating targeted improvements.
Benchmarking with other cities provides perspective
to our performance results, survey results, and
national trends. In the same way that the community
was engaged in developing Forward Fort Lauderdale
2035, the City looks forward to sharing progress and
results, while building transparency, accountability,
and trust as we work together to implement Press
Play Fort Lauderdale 2018.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 17

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget

press play

fort lauderdale

Our City, Our Strategic Plan 2018

Throughout the FY 2014 Adopted Budget, the reader
will find references to the goals and objectives of the
strategic plan. This cascading of the strategic plan
demonstrates each department’s commitment to
achieving results that matter to our neighbors.

INFRASTRUCTURE
	 GOAL 1	

Be a pedestrian friendly, multi-modal City.

	 IN 1.1	 Improve transportation options and reduce congestion by working with agency partners
	 IN 1.2	 Integrate transportation land use and planning to create a walkable and
		 bikeable community
	 IN 1.3 	 Improve pedestrian, bicyclist and vehicular safety
	 GOAL 2	 Be a sustainable and resilient community.
	 IN 2.1	 Proactively maintain our water, wastewater, road and bridge infrastructure
	 IN 2.2	 Reduce flooding and adapt to sea level rise
	 IN 2.3	 Improve climate change resiliency by incorporating local, regional and mega-regional plans
	 IN 2.4	 Reduce solid waste disposal and increase recycling
	 IN 2.5	 Improve air and water quality and our natural environment
	 IN 2.6	 Secure our community’s water supply

PUBLIC PLACES
	 GOAL 3	 Be a community that finds opportunities and leverages partnerships to create unique,
		 inviting, and connected gathering places that highlight our beaches, waterways, urban
		 areas, and parks.
	 PP 3.1	 Improve access to and enjoyment of our beach, Riverwalk, waterways, parks, and open 		
		 spaces for everyone
	 PP 3.2	 Enhance the City’s identity and appearance through well-maintained green space, parks, 		
		 major corridors, gateways, and medians
	 PP 3.3	 Integrate arts and cultural elements into public places
	 PP 3.4	 Cultivate our urban forest
	 PP 3.5	 Work with partners to reduce homelessness by promoting independence and self-worth 		
		 through advocacy, housing, and comprehensive services
	 GOAL 4	 Be a healthy community with fun and stimulating recreational activities for our neighbors.
	 PP 4.1	 Offer a diverse range of youth, adult, and senior recreational programming
	 PP 4.2	 Celebrate our community through special events and sports

18 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget
NEIGHBORHOOD ENHANCEMENT
	 GOAL 5	 Be a community of strong, beautiful, and healthy neighborhoods.
	 NE 5.1	 Increase neighbor engagement and improve communication networks within and
		 among neighborhoods
	 NE 5.2	 Enhance the beauty, aesthetics, and environmental quality of neighborhoods
	 NE 5.3	 Increase healthy living through locally grown and fresh foods
	 GOAL 6	 Be an inclusive community made up of distinct, complementary and diverse neighborhoods.
	 NE 6.1 	 Evolve and update the land development code to balance neighborhood quality, character, 	
		 and livability through sustainable development
	 NE 6.2	 Ensure a range of housing options for current and future neighbors

BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
	 GOAL 7	 Be a well-positioned City within the global economic and tourism markets of the South 	
		 Florida region, leveraging our airports, port, and rail connections.
	 BD 7.1 	 Define, cultivate, and attract targeted and emerging industries
	 BD 7.2	 Facilitate a responsive and proactive business climate
	 BD 7.3	 Advance beach resiliency and renourishment
	 BD 7.4	 Deliver best-in-class regional general aviation airport amenities and services to domestic 	
		 and international stakeholders
	 GOAL 8	 Be known for educational excellence.
	 BD 8.1 	 Create a call to action with our partners to elevate our focus on excellent Pre-K through
		 12th grade quality public and private education
	 BD 8.2	 Develop strategic alliances with business associations, colleges, and universities to connect
		 skills development with jobs

PUBLIC SAFETY
	 GOAL 9	 Be the safest urban coastal city in South Florida through preventative and responsive
		 police and fire protection.
	 PS 9.1	 Prevent and solve crime in all neighborhoods
	 PS 9.2	 Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response
	GOAL 10	 Be a City well-prepared for and responsive to all hazards.
	 PS 10.1	 Provide and effectively communicate comprehensive emergency management planning 	
		 and disaster recovery
	 PS 10.2	 Involve our neighbors with prevention efforts and emergency preparedness

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 19

Integration of the Vision Plan, the Strategic Plan, and the Budget
INTERNAL SUPPORT
	GOAL 11	 Be a well-trained, innovative, and neighbor-centric workforce that builds community.
	 IS 11.1	 Foster professional and rewarding careers
	 IS 11.2	 Improve employee safety and wellness
	 IS 11.3	 Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery
	 IS 11.4	 Provide reliable and progressive technology infrastructure
	GOAL 12	 Be a leading government organization, managing our resources wisely and sustainably.
	 IS 12.1	 Ensure sound fiscal management
	 IS 12.2	 Achieve excellent procurement services through technological advancements, improved 	
		 procedures, and outreach programs
	 IS 12.3	 Provide safe, efficient, and well-maintained vehicles, equipment, and facilities and integrate
		 sustainability into daily operations

20 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Major Revenue Sources
Major sources that make up the General Fund
total revenue include: Ad Valorem/Property
Taxes (28.3%), Sales and Use Tax (1.4%),
Franchise Fees (4.4%), Utility Taxes (10.6%),
Intergovernmental (5.1%), Charges for Services
(7.5%), Licenses & Permits (0.8%), Fines &
Forfeitures (1.4%), Miscellaneous (22.7%), and
Balances, Reserves, and Transfers (17.7%).

The five-year estimates for both revenues and
expenditures in this section were taken from the
financial forecasting model provided by Burton
and Associates during the FY 2014 budget cycle. A
description of each revenue source as well as a
discussion and outlook for next year follows.

Ad Valorem Taxes
The adopted ad valorem or
property tax millage for
operating purposes is 4.1193
and generates $97,569,296
million, or 28.3% of the
General Fund revenue. The tax
rate is made up of two
components: operating millage
rate and voted debt millage
rate. A separate debt levy is
used to pay debt service costs
(principal
and
interest
payments) associated with
outstanding General Obligation
Bonds (GOB). The revenue
collected from the debt levy is
deposited into the Debt Service
Fund.
Over the last few years, property taxable values have been stable and a slight increase in values is
noticeable. The City anticipates steady growth over the next few years. For the FY 2014 tax roll, property
taxable values increased by 4.5%.
The current outstanding debt issues include the General Obligation Fire Bond 2005, and the General
Obligation Refunding Bonds 2011A and 2011B. The adopted debt service payment for the 2005 Fire Bond
Issue is $1,182,011, which requires a levy of $1,182,368 and a millage of 0.0505. The adopted debt service
payment for the General Obligation Refunding Bonds 2011A is $1,146,600, which requires a levy of
$1,147,248 and adopted millage of 0.0490. The adopted debt service payment for the General Obligation
Refunding Bonds 2011B is $2,518,650, which requires a levy of $2,516,922 and adopted millage of 0.1075.
The Debt Service levy totals $4,846,538. The City’s combined Debt Service for FY 2014 is $34.6 million. The
adopted combined millage for operating and debt service for FY 2014 is 4.3263, which represents a .18%
decrease from the 4.3342 FY 2013 combined millage.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 21

Majjor Rev
venue S
Source
es
Fran
nchise Feees 
 

This revenu
ue source con
nsists of paym
ments made  by Florida Poower and Light (FPL) and  Peoples Gas  for the 
privilege off constructingg upon, and o
operating with
hin, the rightss‐of‐way own
ned by the Citty.  The basis for the 
fees  is  prrovided  for  in 
long‐term  agreements  for 
payment  to 
t the  City  of 
6.0%  of  their  gro
oss 
om 
revenue  derived  fro
w
the  City 
C
accounts  within 
limits,  lesss  property  tax 
t
and  minor  fees  previou
usly 
paid to the City.  Projectted 
G
FPL  and  Peoples  Gas 
ees  for  FY  20
014 
franchise  fe
are  $15,228,206,  which 
represents  a  decrease  of 
7.1%  from
m  the  FY  20
013 
amended b
budget.    

 
 

 
 
Sales &
& Use Taxxes 
 

Florida  Stattutes  provide
e  for  the  levyy  of  excise  taaxes  of  1.85%
%  on  fire  insurance  prem
miums  and  0.8
85%  on 
casualty  insurance  prem
miums.    These  funds  are
e  passed  throough  the  Geeneral  Fund  as  revenue  and  an 
expense.  P
Proceeds of these taxes arre distributed
d to eligible m
municipalitiess to supplemeent the Pensiion and 
R
Retirement  Trust  fund
ds  for 
ffirefighters  aand  police  o
officers. 
TThe adopted  revenue for FFY 2014 
iss  $4,882,276  and  is  the  same  as 
tthe  FY  2013  aamended  budget.  A 
rrate  increase  is  not  projeected  in 
ffuture years. 

22 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Majjor Rev
venue S
Source
es
Utility Taxess 
 
This  catego
ory  is  comprised  of  three  major  comp
ponents.    Thee  largest  com
mponent  is  th
he  City  utility  tax  on 
electricity, charged by FPL to its customers.  FPL u
utility tax is pprojected to b
be 50.7% of the adopted FFY 2014 
utility  tax  revenues.  Th
he  second‐larrgest  source  for  this  reveenue  categorry  is  the  Staate  Communiications 
r
Services  Taax.    This  tax  represents 
34.5%  of  the 
t
adopted
d  FY  2014 
utility  tax  revenue,  baased  upon 
estimates  from  the
e  Florida 
Departmen
nt  of  Revenue.    The 
third  component  of  utility  tax 
revenue 
consists 
of 
the 
combinatio
on  of  the  Citty’s  utility 
tax  on  gas  and  water  utility 
u
bills 
for  custom
mers  within  the  City. 
Water  utility  taxes  increase  as 
water ratess increase. Th
he adopted 
revenue  for  FY  2014  is 
$36,592,96
65,  which  rep
presents  a 
3.5%  increase  from  the
e  FY  2013 
amended b
budget.  

 
 
Charge
es for Servvices 
 

This catego
ory is associatted with reve
enue received
d from users  of specific seervices, including fees forr police, 
fire related inspections, planning, an
nd docks, as w
well as parks  and recreation.  The adopted revenuee for FY 
2014  is  $
$26,036,670,  which 
representts  a  29.6%  in
ncrease 
from  the  FY  2013  am
mended 
budget.  The  increaase  is 
primarily  associated  w
with  the 
taxes  collected  on  pro
operties 
that  are  currently  leaased  to 
outside orrganizations aand the 
general  ffund  recognittion  of 
sanitation
n  related  private 
collector ffees. 
 
 
 

      
 
 
 
 

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 23

Majjor Rev
venue S
Source
es
Licenses &
& Permit Fees* 
 

This revenu
ue category in
ncludes local  business tax  receipts issuued to authorrize businessees to operatee within 
the  City  liimits  and  development 
permits  issued  to  authorize 
building  and  constructtion  within 
the  City  limits.    Th
he  adopted 
revenue  for  FY  2014  is  $2,924,286, 
7%  decrease 
which  reprresents  a  5.7
from the FYY 2013 amend
ded budget. 
A conservative approach to growth 
in  new  bu
usinesses  (O
Occupational 
Licenses) w
was included in FY 2014.  
 
*The  Build
ding  Permit  Fees  were 
included  in
n  the  Genera
al  Fund  and 
moved to th
he Building Fu
und as of FY 
2011. 

 
 
 
In
ntergovern
nmental R
Revenue
 

ue  source  is  recurring  Staate  shared  and  County  s hared  revenu
ue.    The  Statte  of  Florida  shares 
This  revenu
motor fuel,, alcoholic be
everage licensse, and sales  tax revenue w
with local go
overnments based on popu
ulation.  
Broward  Co
ounty  provides  gasoline  tax 
t and  local  business  taxx  receipt  reveenue.    The  adopted  reven
nue  for     
FY  2014  is  $17,749,691,  which  repre
esents  a  5.6%
%  decrease  frrom  the  FY  22013  amendeed  budget,  prrimarily 
due  to  an  un
nfunded 
mandaate  for  emeergency 
911  seervices  in  FYY  2013 
that  included  revenue 
sharingg  for  911  seervices, 
and  reeductions  in  motor 
fuel  taaxes  and  staate  gas 
tax  rellated  refundss  in  FY 
2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Majjor Rev
venue S
Source
es
Fines &
& Forfeitu
ures 
 

This revenu
ue category includes finess for traffic an
nd other viol ations collectted by the Co
ounty on ourr behalf 
through  the  judicial  pro
ocess.    This  category  represents  1.4%  of  all  Generaal  Fund  resou
urces.    The  adopted 
revenue for FY 2014 is $
$4,799,918, w
which represe
ents a 24.8%  increase from
m the FY 201
13 amended b
budget, 
primaarily  due  to  tthe  addition  of  new 
cameera  locationss  for  the  Red  Light 
Cameera Enforcem
ment Program.   
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Miscellan
neous Revvenue 
 

 

This  revenu
ue  source  includes  intere
est  earnings,  rents,  fire  aassessment,  and  interfun
nd  charges.  TThe  fire 
assessmentt  fee,  which  appears  as  a  non‐ad  valorem  charg e  on  the  taxx  bill  was  ad
dopted  at  $2
225  per 
residential  parcel  in  FYY  2014.  The 
adopted  miscellaneous 
revenue  for 
m
FY  2014  including  the  Fire 
Assessmentt  is  $78,384
4,413,  which 
represents  an  increase
e  of  15.6% 
from the FYY 2013 amend
ded budget. 

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 25

Major
M
Expend
E
diture Categories
 
Major categories that m
make up the G
General Fund
d 
expenditure
es  include:  Salaries 
S
&  Waages  (37.8%),, 
Fringe  Ben
nefits  (14.6%
%),  Services  &  Materialss 
(9.6%),  Oth
her  Operatin
ng  (9.6%),  Caapital  Outlayy    
(0.3%), and
d Balances and
d Transfers (2
28.1%).  

 
for sservices and ccosts of suppllies and servicces.  To 
keepp in line with  shrinking thee size of government 
the  City  has  elim
minated  238  full  time  po
ositions, 
sincee  FY  2008.    Due  to  curreent  condition
ns,  City 
Mannagement hass implementeed a policy to reduce 
discrretionary speending. 

 

The  City’s  future 
f
will  be
e  shaped  by  the  strategicc 
goals  of  our 
o
neighborrs  and  City  Commission
n 
through  th
heir  planningg  process.    In  the  pastt 
decade,  expenses  have  steadily  tren
nded  upward
d 
d 
due  to  the  City’s  increaase  in  population  demand

  

A  deescription  off  each  expen
nditure  categgory  as 
well  as  a  discusssion  and  outtlook  over  th
he  next 
five yyears followss.  
 

Salaaries & Waages 
 

e  largest  expenditure  category  and  re
epresents  455.9%  of  all  G
General  Fund
d  expenditures,  excluding
g 
This  is  the
balances  an
nd  reserves.  The  adopted
d  expenditure
e  for  FY  20144  is  $130,407,509,  which  represents  a  .1%  increase
e 
from  the  FYY  2013  amen
nded  budget. 
The  major  eexpenses  in  this  category
y 
include  the  following:  saalaries,  otherr 
wages, overttime, and lon
ngevity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fringe B
Benefits 
 
This  expen
nditure  categgory  includess 
pension,  so
ocial  security,,  health  care, 
and retiree health care.  The adopted
d 
expenditure
es  for  FYY  2014  iss 
$50,414,98
80,  which  represents 
r
a 
a
5.5%  incre
ease  from  the 
t
FY  2013
3 
amended  budget, 
b
prim
marily  due  to
o 
insurance  premiums. 
p
Th
he  projection
n 
includes a 6
6.6% annual  increase overr 
the five yeaars.   

 

26 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Majorr Expen
nditure
e Categ
gories
 
Servicces & Matterials 
 

 

This  exxpenditure  caategory  inclu
udes  electricitty,  gasoline,  supplies,  eq
quipment,  other  services,,  and  other 
utilitiess.    The  adoptted  budget  fo
or  FY  2014  is  $32,997,6999,  which  reprresents  a  9.1%  decrease  ffrom  the  FY 
22013  amendeed  budget.  For  FY  2014,    
EEmergency  9
911  Call  Ceenter  costs 
h
have  been  reemoved  due  to  the  new   
iintegrated  Brroward  Coun
nty  regional 
ssystem,  whicch  will  proviide  county‐
w
wide  servicees.  Over  thee  next  five 
yyears,  the  projection  iss  a  stable 
iinflationary  factor  of  1.0%  for 
iinflation of seensitive itemss. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Ope
O
erating Exp
penditurees 
 

This expenditure inccludes liabilityy and propertty insurance ppremiums, in
nterfund service charges, ffleet related 
d,  and  fleet  replacementt  charges.    TThe  adopted  budget  for         
operatiing  and    maintenance,  fleet  overhead
FY 2014
4 is $33,093,207, which represents an
n 18.2% increease from thee FY 2013 am
mended  budgget, which is 
primariily  due  to  in
ncreases 
in  the  cost  of  information 
technology,  city‐wide  cost 
allocation charges and fleet 
related charges. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 27

Major Expenditure Categories
Capital Outlay and Debt Services
This expenditure category includes a combination of expenditures that represents $1,000,000, which is 0.4%
of the General Fund expenditures. In FY 2013, a payment was made for the interest on a short term loan in
the amount of $351,167.
DEBT EXPENDITURES
Thousands
$400.0
$350.0
$300.0
$250.0
$200.0
$150.0
$100.0

$50.0
$0.0
Actual
2010

28 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Actual
2011

Actual
2012

Amended
2013

Adopted
2014

Forecast
2015

Forecast
2016

Forecast
2017

Forecast
2018

Forecast
2019

Fund Descriptions
Governmental Fund Types
Governmental Funds are those through which
most governmental functions of the City are
financed. The funds are fiscal and accounting
entities with a self-balancing set of accounts
recording cash and other financial resources
along with all related liabilities and residual
equities or balances and related changes. The
acquisition, use, and balances of the City’s
expendable financial resources and the related
liabilities (except those accounted for in
proprietary funds) are accounted for through
governmental funds. The measurement focus is
on determination of changes in financial
position, rather than net income. The following
are the City’s governmental fund types:

General Fund - The General Fund is the
general operating fund of the City. All general
tax revenues and other receipts that are not
allocated by law or contractual agreement to
another fund are accounted for in this fund.
The general operating expenditures, fixed
charges, and capital improvement costs that are
not paid through other funds are paid from the
General Fund.

Debt Service Funds - Debt Service Funds are
used to account for the annual payment of
principal, interest, and other expenditures on
general long-term debt, other than bonds
payable from the operations of the enterprise
funds. Funds of this type are:
 General Obligation Bonds
 Special Obligation Loans
 Tax Increment Revenue Bonds

Capital Projects Funds - Capital Projects
Funds are used to account for financial
resources segregated for the acquisition or
construction of major capital facilities other
than those financed by enterprise operations.
Specific appropriations for these funds are
summarized in the Community Investment Plan.

Special Revenue Funds - Special Revenue
Funds are used to account for the proceeds of
specific revenue sources (other than major
capital projects) requiring separate accounting
because of legal and/or regulatory provisions or
administrative action. Funds of this type are:











Community Redevelopment Agencies (CRA)
Beach Business Improvement District
Housing & Community Development (HCD)
State Housing Initiative Program (SHIP)
Sunrise Key Neighborhood Improvement
District
Building Permits
Building Certification Maintenance
Building Technology Funds
School Crossing Guard Fund
Police Confiscation Funds

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 29

Fund Descriptions
Proprietary Fund Types

Other Fund Types

Proprietary Funds are used to account for the
City’s ongoing organizations and activities which
are similar to those often found in the private
sector. Following are the City’s proprietary fund
types.

In the City’s accounting system, there are other
fund types. These funds are fiduciary funds and
account groups.

Enterprise Funds - Enterprise Funds are used
to account for operations that provide a service
to citizens, financed primarily by a user charge,
and where the periodic measurement of net
income is deemed appropriate for capital
maintenance, public policy, management
control, accountability or other purposes.
Funds of this type are:







Sanitation
Water and Sewer
Central Regional Wastewater System
Parking System
Executive Airport
Stormwater Management

Internal Service Funds

- Internal Service
Funds are used to account for the financing of
goods or services provided by one department
to other departments of the City or to other
governmental units. Funds of this type are:
 City Insurance
 Health Benefit Insurance
 Central Services (Information Technology
Services)
 Vehicle Rental (Fleet Management)

30 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fiduciary Funds - Fiduciary Funds are used to
account for assets held by the City in a trustee
capacity for individuals, private organizations,
other governmental units, and/or other funds.
Funds of this type are:





General Employees Pension Fund
Police & Fire Pension Funds
Arts and Science District Garage
Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund

Contributions to the pension plans and deferred
compensation are reflected in the adopted
budget. The City contributes no money to the
Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund because the
function is privatized. The Arts and Science
District Garage, while managed by the
Transportation and Mobility staff, is handled as
a separate function on behalf of the Performing
Arts Center Authority and the Downtown
Development Authority.

Fund Highlights
Water and Sewer Fund
The City supplies water and sewer services on a
regional basis for approximately 250,000
residents of central Broward County. Areas
serviced by the City’s water treatment and
distribution system include Fort Lauderdale,
Port Everglades, Sea Ranch Lakes, Lauderdaleby-the-Sea, Oakland Park, Wilton Manors, and
portions of Davie, Tamarac, and unincorporated
Broward County.
The total FY 2014 adopted operating budget
and transfers for the Water and Sewer Fund is
$105,048,721. The budget includes increases
due to Consumer Price Index (CPI) increases on
utilities and contractual agreements.

The City, through Large User Agreements,
operates the Central Regional Wastewater
System to provide treatment services for Fort
Lauderdale, Oakland Park, Wilton Manors, Port
Everglades, parts of Tamarac and Davie. These
agreements, necessitated by federal funding
requirements, establish the methodology for
setting rates to large users. The City
Commission establishes a billing rate based
upon estimated expenses for the coming fiscal
year. At the close of each fiscal year, the fund is
audited and the actual rate is determined. If
necessary, lump sum rebates or charges are
made to adjust the amounts paid during the
year.

Effective October 1, 2013, the rates increased
by 5.00% based on City ordinance. The impact
of the approved rate increase on a residential
customer using 5,000 gallons of water monthly
amounts to $2.47, illustrated as follows:

The Wastewater Large User Regional Advisory
Board, as established by City Code, serves in an
advisory capacity to the City Commission and
the Central Wastewater Region for the purpose
of making recommendations regarding rates
and modifications to wastewater facilities. The
approved rate is $1.44 per 1,000 gallons.

Effect of Adopted Increase on Base Monthly
Water & Sewer Rates (5,000 gallons/month)

The FY 2014 adopted operating budget and
transfers for the Central Regional Wastewater
System is $22,287,235.

5/8 inch meter
Water Charge
Sewer Charge
Total

Old Rate
$
18.46
30.96
$
49.42

New Rate
19.38
32.51
51.89

Increase
0.92
1.55
2.47

Sanitation Fund
The Sanitation Fund provides the City a full
complement of modern solid waste services by
providing residential household garbage,
recycling, yard waste, and bulk trash collection.
The fund also supports canal cleaning, lot
cleaning and rights of way maintenance, public
trash receptacles, and street cleaning services.
The licensing of private collectors and the
collection of commercial franchise fees are
provided along with large-scale Emergency
Debris Management services.
The remediation and closure of the Wingate
Landfill and Incinerator site has been finalized;
however, the City has an obligation to perform
ongoing environmental monitoring of the
property until 2032.
.

Drop Savers Poster Contest Winner: Madelyn Pietraszewski

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 31

Fund Highlights
The total FY 2014 adopted operating budget
and transfers for the Sanitation Fund is
$20,376,271. The budget includes funding for
Wingate monitoring costs, sanitation carts,
Green Your Routine programs, and event
advertising and marketing.
In addition, the Sanitation Fund will take
ownership of the beach cleaning responsibilities
from the general fund at a cost of $2,129,969.

Parking Fund
The Parking Fund is a self-sustaining fund, using
no tax dollars to fund the parking operation
including garages; lots; enforcement; and
managerial,
administrative,
and
field
personnel. All salaries, benefits, and expenses
are paid exclusively from user-based revenues
collected from meters, the sales of permits, and
citations. Excess revenues are accumulated in
the fund balance to finance major
reconstruction and rehabilitation projects of the
City's garages and parking lots without tax
dollars or outside financing. The City’s parking
system includes over 10,000 parking spaces in 4
parking garages and 34 parking lots, as well as
on-street parking.
The FY 2014 adopted operating budget and
transfers is $15,677,666. The budget includes
an ROI of approximately $3,079,136 to the
general fund.

Stormwater Management Fund
The revenues collected for the City’s
Stormwater Management Program are used for
operating expenses and capital improvements
directly related to the management of
stormwater, including improvements designed
to improve water quality in the City’s

32 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

waterways. The FY 2014 adopted operating
budget and transfers for the Stormwater Fund
is $7,508,909.
Stormwater billing will be based on the
following:
Residential property with three units or less will
be billed $3.95 per month per unit.
Commercial and industrial properties, as well as
multifamily residential with four units or more,
will be billed $39.88 per acre per month.
Properties with low runoff characteristics, such
as vacant land, parks and well fields, will be
billed $12.64 per acre per month.

Central Services Fund
The Central Services Fund is established to
provide citywide computer application,
infrastructure
implementation,
geospatial
services, and network support. This fund
supports approximately 200 physical and virtual
servers, 55 databases, and 2,000 email
accounts.
Core
services
include
the
management of integrated applications to
effectively deliver City services, such as on-line
bill pay for utility services, parking tickets, and
parks registration fees.
In addition, the Central Services Fund is
responsible
for
the
around-the-clock
applications and security systems, such as
voicemail, call center, digital signage, firewall,
remote access and web filtering.
The FY 2014 adopted budget and transfers for
the Central Service Fund is $16,442,937.

Fund Highlights
Vehicle Rental (Fleet) Fund
The City’s fleet consists of 1,489 vehicles and
rolling stock and oversees five fueling facilities.
The FY 2014 adopted budget and transfers is
$15,308,240.
Fleet Services is accredited by Fleet Counselors
under the auspices of nationally recognized
non-profit fleet educational agencies, as a
Nationally Certified Fleet. This certification
requires proficiency in twenty (20) areas of
competence based on national benchmark
standards for fleet management. There are only
twelve fleets in the nation that have obtained
this certification and received the coveted
Crystal Award. The City’s fleet is the first public
fleet with a privatized vehicle maintenance
contractor to be nationally certified. In 2012,
the City was reaccredited and nationally
recognized at the Government Fleet Conference
and Expo in Denver, Colorado.
The City‘s Fleet is consistently among the top
100 fleets in North America, which is sponsored
by Government Fleet Magazine. Annually, over
1,600 fleets apply for this recognition. In FY
2013, the City’s Fleet ranked 20th among the top
100 fleets. In FY 2013, First Vehicle Services
(FVS), the department’s vehicle maintenance
contractor, was awarded the “Blue Seal
Certification” from Automotive Services
Excellent (ASE). For the tenth (10th) straight year
the FVS Fort Lauderdale operation received this
national recognition as an ASE Blue Seal of
Excellence repair facility.
Fleet Services concluded a four-year vehicle and
equipment utilization study and fleet right
sizing, right purposing program. The program is
undergoing
continuous
evaluation
and
improvements for additional efficiencies. The
following shows the fleet reduction and
expenditure savings to the City’s budget.












Underutilized vehicles turned in: 66
Vehicles removed from inventory: 50
Vehicles reassigned: 27
Vehicles sold at auction: 41
Vehicles pending auction: 6
Capital Cost Savings: $1,907,048
Annual Maintenance Cost Savings:
$156,280
Annual Replacement Cost Savings:
$246,740
Total Budgetary Savings: $403,020
Total Capital and operational Savings:
$2,713,088.

Fleet Services used funds from a Department of
Energy Grant to purchase a Chevrolet Volt (EV).
We project a reduction of 64,089 lbs. of Co2
displaced into the atmosphere over the life of
this vehicle.
To increase fuel savings, reduce gas emissions,
and reduce our carbon footprint, Fleet services
established an official City policy to eliminate
unnecessary engine idling. These measures
have resulted in a 2.4% reduction in fuel usage
from the previous year, 34,738 gallons of
unleaded and diesel fuel, for a cost savings of
$119,844. In FY 2013, the fuel usage was 2.4%
less than the previous year. At the current
percentage of fuel reduction, there will be a
projected fuel savings of 45,068 gallons with a
cost savings of $155,485.
In FY 2013, renovations to City facilities
provided three dedicated vehicle repair bays for
fire-rescue vehicles, two bays for turf
equipment and utility carts, and a bay
dedicated to medium to heavy-duty vehicles.
These renovations yielded an increase in
technician efficiencies, increase in the level of
production, and created a safer working
environment. In addition, a parking lot
reconfiguration provided safer movement of
vehicles waiting to be serviced.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 33

Fund Highlights
Airport System Fund
The Executive Airport Division of the
Transportation and Mobility Department (FXE)
develops, operates, and promotes Fort
Lauderdale Executive Airport and Industrial
Airpark, the Downtown Helistop, and ForeignTrade Zone #241. The Airport’s mission is to
attract businesses to the area and help those
businesses prosper while being a benefit to the
community.





(LEED) certified U.S. Customs and
Border Protection facility
Taxiway enhancement projects
Airfield Lighting Rehabilitation
Lighting Control Panels for new Air
Traffic Control Tower

The FY 2014 adopted budget and transfers is
$9,339,011.

Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund

Executive Airport is unique in the Southeast in
that it offers a 24-hour Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) Air Traffic Control Tower,
an Instrument Landing System, a 6,000-foot
runway, Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting
services, U.S. Customs and Border Protection,
24-hour security, and a police substation on
property. In recognition of Executive Airport’s
role in the general aviation industry, the Florida
Department of Transportation named FXE the
2010 Community Airport of the Year.

The Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund is
established for purposes of managing the City’s
four cemeteries: Woodlawn, Evergreen, Sunset
Memorial Gardens and Lauderdale Memorial
Park. The cemeteries have been owned by the
City since 1917, and are operated and
maintained by a private contractor. The FY 2014
adopted operating budget for the Cemetery
Perpetual Care Fund is $870,000.

This award-winning facility is home to over 700
aircraft, including 115 jets, and 59 helicopters;
more than any other airport in the
Southeastern United States. Five fixed-base
operators provide a full spectrum of services,
including fueling, avionics, maintenance,
charters, aircraft sales and leasing, and air
ambulance. The economically significant
Executive Airport’s tenants provide over 5,000
jobs and contribute more than $2 million in
property tax revenue to the City.

The Performing Arts Center Authority (PACA) is
a 950 space parking garage located in the Arts
and Science District of the City, with the City
having full and exclusive responsibility for
operations and maintenance of the garage. This
is a joint venture with the City, the PACA, and
the Downtown Development Authority (DDA).
The City has 16% interest, the DDA 42% interest
and PACA 42% interest. The Transportation and
Mobility Department, Parking Services Division
collects the revenue and manages the garage,
and the Finance Department distributes the
funds to the DDA and PACA. The City’s net
income from the garage has historically been
zero. At the end of each fiscal year, shares of
the net revenue are paid to PACA as a social
contribution, not to exceed $300,000 for the
fiscal year. Any revenue collected over the
$300,000 is revenue to the City. The FY 2014
adopted operating budget for the Arts and
Science District Garage is $899,584.

The Airport is self-sustaining, with revenue
generated by land leases and fuel flowage fees.
The Division administers 38 land leases for both
aviation-related and Industrial Airpark parcels
on the 1,100-acre property.
A number of Community Investment Projects
are currently under development that will
continue
to
enhance
the
Airport’s
infrastructure. Some of these projects include:


Construction of a new Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design

34 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Arts and Science District Garage Fund

Fund Highlights
Sunrise Key Neighborhood
Improvement District Fund

Community Redevelopment
Agency Fund

In accordance with the State Statute regarding
safe neighborhood districts, the following
budget is based upon the adopted millage rate
of 1.0000 mill. The revenue generated from this
assessment and an appropriation from fund
balance in the amount of $536 supports the
district’s budget as shown:

The City has one Community Redevelopment
Agency (CRA) with three redevelopment
areas: Central Beach, Northwest Progresso
Flagler Heights (NWPFH) and the newly created
Central City, formerly the Middle River- South
Middle River-Sunrise Blvd. district. The purpose
of the CRA is to spur redevelopment in areas
that would not move forward economically
without public investment. The primary source
of revenue for the CRA is the tax increment,
which is the millage rates of the City, Broward
County, the Hospital District, and the Children’s
Services Council applied to the increase in the
taxable value of property within the CRA since
the creation of the agency. However, the
revenue sources for the Central City CRA are
limited to tax increment portion from the City
of Fort Lauderdale. The Property Appraiser has
provided the following final net taxable value
amounts as compared to last year:

FY 2014 Adopted Budget
Insurance
Accounting & Administration
Vehicle Rental
Gate & Home Repair
Security (includes Comcast cameras)
Landscaping/Lawn Maintenance
Miscellaneous (Special District fees, etc.)
Contingencies
TOTAL

$

$

7,500
200
4,200
3,500
52,600
5,000
1,000
1,000
75,000

Lauderdale Isles Water
Management District Fund
Following the annexation of the Riverland Road
area in September 2002, the Lauderdale Isles
Water Management District is a special district
authorized by Section 197.3632, Florida
Statutes to address water quality issues. This
district, currently composed of 551 properties
adjoining the waterways that run through the
Riverland area, continues to levy an assessment
of $15 per property for enhancement of their
aquatic weed control efforts in their canals.
The district adopted their budget in the amount
of $89,701.12 based upon an assessment of $15
per property and other revenue sources. The
district’s budget was adopted at their May 25th,
2013 meeting. The TRIM (Truth-in-Millage)
notice advises the property owners of this
assessment.

FY 2013

FY 2014

Fort Lauderdale Beach

$667.0 M

$685.3 M

2.7%

Northwest Progresso

$657.8 M

$677.0 M

2.9%

Central City

$150.2 M

$156.1 M

3.9%

Area

% Change

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 35

All Funds Summary
FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

REVENUES
Taxes
Licenses & Permits
Intergovernmental
Charges For Services
Fines and Forfeits
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$      152,879,458
           14,913,014
           37,994,569
        225,065,132
             6,028,849
           75,686,388
           37,706,553
           32,197,939
        582,471,902

$      155,478,907
           13,942,455
           41,183,169
        236,103,530
             7,452,122
           82,362,374
        417,626,571
           65,839,598
     1,019,988,726

$      155,965,417
           18,104,767
           36,553,140
        234,717,034
             7,617,084
           84,188,206
        414,752,750
           58,795,054
     1,010,693,452

$      159,198,827
           18,239,090
           35,714,954
        250,685,808
             8,707,418
           90,805,957
           36,966,437
           18,998,222
        619,316,713

$           3,719,920
             4,296,635
            (5,468,215)
           14,582,278
             1,255,296
             8,443,583
       (380,660,134)
         (46,841,376)
       (400,672,013)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Total Other Resources

        167,481,514
                         ‐
             2,000,000
           15,000,000
           40,921,394
        225,402,908

 
        112,741,433
                         ‐
             3,000,000
           28,088,083
           42,750,071
        186,579,587

        116,363,293
                         ‐
             3,000,000
           28,088,083
           46,172,755
        193,624,131

           78,769,855
             4,457,240
             4,000,000
           13,274,563
        110,354,361
        210,856,019

         (33,971,578)
             4,457,240
             1,000,000
         (14,813,520)
           67,604,290
          24,276,432

Due To/From Health Benefits

                         ‐

                        ‐

Total Resources Available

        807,874,810    1,206,568,313
 
 

   1,204,317,583

       832,277,622        (374,290,691)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services/Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Grant Services
1
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

        167,526,402
           92,150,184
           91,404,807
        104,116,256
           11,359,293
           48,091,295
            3,380,577
           37,426,811
        555,455,625

      170,445,627
         63,922,620
      110,109,067
      121,617,014
         26,729,387
         80,942,608
         13,085,547
      412,584,079
       999,435,949

      169,069,642
      382,268,094
         99,112,372
      121,310,844
         10,455,542
         81,931,745
         10,747,308
         99,567,795
       974,463,342

      174,379,869
         68,716,238
         97,089,556
      122,750,885
         10,338,169
         67,749,675
           8,872,414
         61,397,228
       611,294,034

Due To/From Health Benefits
Due To/From Special Assessments
Total Due To/From

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐

                        ‐
            1,334,738
            1,334,738

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

            2,104,890              2,104,890
            (1,334,738)
                        ‐
            2,104,890                 770,152

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Total Other Uses

        108,698,456
                         ‐
             3,000,000
           28,088,083
        112,632,646
        252,419,185

         57,509,237
         16,144,538
            4,000,000
         13,274,563
       114,869,288
      205,797,626

         91,162,199
            4,457,240
            4,000,000
         13,274,563
       116,960,239
      229,854,241

         98,548,041            41,038,804
            4,457,240          (11,687,298)
            5,000,000              1,000,000
         (13,274,563)
                        ‐
       110,873,417             (3,995,871)
      218,878,698           13,081,072

Total Resources Allocated

$      807,874,810 $  1,206,568,313 $  1,204,317,583 $     832,277,622 $    (374,290,691)

1

FY 2014         
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

           2,104,890              2,104,890

             3,934,242
             4,793,618
         (13,019,511)
             1,133,871
         (16,391,218)
         (13,192,933)
            (4,213,133)
       (351,186,851)
       (388,141,915)

Includes a one‐time transfer from the Special Obligation Bond proceeds in the amount of $33.9MM FY 2013

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other Sources
6.0%
Miscellaneous
14.6%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance
3.1%

Grant 
Debt Services
Service 1.5%
Capital 11.1%
Outlay
1.7%

Taxes
25.7%

Fines and 
Forfeits
1.4%

Licenses 
& Permits
2.9%
Charges for 
Services
40.4%

36 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Inter‐
governmental
5.8%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
20.1%

Transfers 
Out1
10.0%

Salaries & 
Wages
28.5%

Services & 
Materials
15.9%

Fringe 
Benefits
11.2%

General Fund
FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

 FY 2014 
Adopted 

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Taxes
Licenses & Permits
Intergovernmental
Charges For Services
Fines and Forfeits
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$    148,991,788
           3,029,521
        17,033,379
        20,096,108
           2,785,551
        59,812,937
        13,027,340
           2,858,683
      267,635,307

$    150,558,419
           3,100,670
        18,800,975
        20,096,159
           3,845,122
        67,781,147
        18,463,241
           1,908,812
      284,554,545

$    151,058,419
           2,830,064
        17,612,445
        20,388,736
           4,026,814
        67,280,699
        18,463,241
           7,772,816
      289,433,234

      154,272,743
           2,924,286
        17,749,691
        26,036,670
           4,799,918
        78,384,413
              982,884
                      ‐
      285,150,605

$        3,714,324
             (176,384)
         (1,051,284)
           5,940,511
              954,796
        10,603,266
       (17,480,357)
         (1,908,812)
              596,060

OTHER RESOURCES
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Prior Year Operating Balance
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

 
                      ‐
                      ‐
           2,000,000            3,000,000            3,000,000
        15,000,000         28,088,083         28,088,083
              648,822               635,183               635,183
        42,565,667         26,582,415         20,718,411
        60,214,489         58,305,681         52,441,677
      327,849,796      342,860,226      341,874,911

           4,457,240
           4,000,000
        13,274,563
              635,183
        37,760,180
        60,127,166
     345,277,771

           4,457,240
           1,000,000
       (14,813,520)
                      ‐
        11,177,765
          1,821,485
          2,417,545

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

      133,311,311       130,256,534       129,435,880       130,407,509
        73,037,412         47,806,412         46,952,457         50,414,980
        29,064,421         36,285,932         35,143,160         32,997,699
        24,665,875         28,057,737         28,838,369         33,155,141
              275,599            1,092,936            1,039,415            1,000,000
                      ‐
              351,166               351,167                       ‐
           7,280,685         40,703,828         39,987,297         36,170,386
      267,635,303       284,554,545       281,747,745       284,145,715

              150,975
           2,608,568
         (3,288,233)
           5,097,404
               (92,936)
             (351,166)
         (4,533,442)
            (408,830)

DUE TO/FROM
                      ‐
Due To/From Health Benefits Fund
Due To/From Special Assessments Fund                       ‐
Total Due To/From
                      ‐

                     ‐
         1,334,738
          1,334,738

                     ‐
                     ‐
                      ‐

          2,104,890            2,104,890
         (1,334,738)
                     ‐
          2,104,890               770,152

OTHER USES
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses

        16,144,538
           4,000,000
        13,274,563
              635,183
        22,916,659
        56,970,943

           4,457,240
           4,000,000
        13,274,563
              635,183
        37,760,180
        60,127,166

 
           4,457,240        (11,687,298)
           5,000,000            1,000,000
       (13,274,563)
                      ‐
              635,183                       ‐
        48,934,743         26,018,084
        59,027,166           2,056,223

                      ‐
           3,000,000
        28,088,083
              635,183
        28,491,227
        60,214,493

Total Resources Allocated

$    327,849,796 $    342,860,226 $    341,874,911
 

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Preliminary Revenues
FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Miscellaneous

Other 
Sources
0.4%

28.5%

Fines and 
Forfeits
1.7%
Charges for 
Inter‐
Services
governmental
9.1%
6.2%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
11.6%

Taxes
54.1%
Licenses & 
Permits
1.0%

     345,277,771 $        2,417,545

Capital 
Outlay
0.4%

Services & 
Materials
11.6%

Transfers Out
12.7%

Salaries & 
Wages
45.9%

Fringe 
Benefits
17.8%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 37

Airport System Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar
 Difference

REVENUES
Intergovt Revenue
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$        1,264,013 $        3,567,373 $                    ‐
$                    ‐
          3,477,926
3,104,336
3,244,509
3,591,685
          3,814,918
3,688,536
4,234,564
3,925,098
                     ‐
            369,540
369,540                      ‐
                      ‐
3,564,496
950,876
1,822,228
          8,556,857
14,294,281
8,799,489
9,339,011

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

        16,592,052
        16,592,052
        25,148,910

14,139,410
14,139,410
28,433,691

16,753,030
16,753,030
25,552,519

14,930,802              791,391
14,930,802             791,391
24,269,813         (4,163,879)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

             924,944
              448,982
          1,714,675
          2,517,836
          1,838,567
                     ‐
          7,445,004

1,141,422
455,671
3,801,954
2,957,431
5,770,099
            167,705
14,294,281

1,040,934
304,641
2,553,964
3,184,573
37,000
        1,678,378
8,799,489

1,252,921              111,499
416,808                (38,863)
2,456,846         (1,345,108)
2,818,555             (138,876)
225,718         (5,544,381)
         2,168,163          2,000,459
9,339,011         (4,955,270)

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

17,703,906
14,139,410         16,753,030
14,930,802               791,391
        17,703,906
14,139,410
16,753,030
14,930,802              791,391
$      25,148,910 $     28,433,691 $     25,552,519 $      24,269,813 $     (4,163,879)

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Salaries & 
Wages
5.2%

Charges For 
Services
14.8%
Miscellaneous
16.2%

Other 
Resources
61.5%

38 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Appropriated 
Fund Balance
7.5%

$       (3,567,373)
              487,349
             236,562
           (369,540)
         (1,742,268)
         (4,955,270)

Other Uses
61.5%

Fringe Benefits
1.7%

Services & 
Materials
10.1%
Other 
Operating
Expenses
11.6%

Capital 
Outlay
0.9%
Transfers Out
8.9%

Arts & Science District Garage Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

 FY 2014 
Adopted 

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$        1,154,044 $        1,451,345 $           998,000 $           899,584 $          (551,761)
                  3,301                       ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                24,927                       ‐
                      ‐
               (24,927)
1,157,346
1,476,272
998,000
899,584             (576,688)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

                      ‐
               (24,927)                       ‐
                      ‐
              (24,927)                       ‐
1,157,346
1,451,345
998,000

 
                      ‐
          24,926.85
                      ‐
                24,927
899,584             (551,761)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Total Expenses

118,669
50,865
965,212
22,601
                      ‐
1,157,346

89,575
5,525
598,617
188,983
115,300
998,000

113,998                 52,978
7,573                   3,328
636,071             (453,803)
141,942               (44,881)
                      ‐
            (134,310)
899,584             (576,688)

                      ‐
               (24,927)                       ‐
                     ‐
            (24,927)                     ‐
$        1,157,346 $       1,451,345 $          998,000

                      ‐
                      ‐
                     ‐
               24,927
$           899,584 $         (551,761)

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated
 

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

61,020
4,245
1,089,874
186,823
134,310
1,476,272

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses
Salaries & 
Wages 
12.7%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
15.8%

Charges for 
Services 
100.0%

Fringe Benefit
0.8%

Services & 
Materials 
70.7%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 39

Beach Business Improvement District Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

 FY 2014 
Adopted 

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$           548,085 $           634,723 $           634,723 $           641,730 $                7,007
                15,365                 49,309                       ‐
                32,326                (16,983)
563,450
684,032
634,723
674,056                  (9,976)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

              152,207               102,898
152,207              102,898
715,657
786,930

152,207
152,207
786,930

349,185               246,287
349,185              246,287
1,023,241              236,311

EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

393,915
138,285
31,250
563,450

464,586
219,446
                      ‐
684,032

274,248
131,171
                      ‐
405,419

429,108
244,948
                      ‐
674,056

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

152,207
152,207
$          715,657

102,898
102,898
$          786,930

381,511
381,511
$          786,930

349,185               246,287
349,185              246,287
$        1,023,241 $          236,311

               (35,478)
                25,502
                           ‐
                 (9,976)

 

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Other 
Resources 
34.1%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
3.2%

40 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Services & 
Materials 
42.0%

Other Uses 
34.1%

Miscellaneous 
62.7%
Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
23.9%

Building Funds
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

 FY 2014 
Adopted 

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Licenses & Permits
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues

$      11,883,493 $      10,841,785 $      15,274,703 $      15,314,804 $        4,473,019
30,582
55,500
72,803
56,515                   1,015
33,952.30
17,000
40,093
119,949               102,949
11,948,027
10,914,285
15,387,599
15,491,268           4,576,983

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

          4,495,544
          4,495,544
16,443,571

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

3,455,140
1,826,837
538,945
1,144,476
10,643
                     ‐
6,976,042

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

          2,114,707           1,929,243
2,110,335           2,160,213
7,352,822
9,256,086
14,035,279
17,228,683
9,467,529
11,185,329
16,145,614
19,388,896
$      16,443,571 $     20,381,814 $     24,855,128 $      31,636,882

9,467,529
9,467,529
20,381,814

9,467,529
9,467,529
24,855,128

16,145,614           6,678,085
16,145,614           6,678,085
31,636,882         11,255,068

3,563,733
3,532,660
3,836,210
1,358,192
1,357,966
1,586,254
1,557,145
1,559,549
3,439,653
882,599
865,523
1,852,134
441,000                       ‐
                90,000
1,393,816
1,393,816
1,443,735
9,196,485
8,709,513
12,247,986

Salaries & 
Wages 
12.1%
Licenses & 
Permits 
48.4%

Other Uses 
61.3%
Miscellaneous 
0.4%

              230,970
          7,972,597
          8,203,567
$     11,255,068

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Other 
Resources 
51.0%

              272,477
              228,062
          1,882,508
              969,535
            (351,000)
               49,919
          3,051,500

Fringe 
Benefits 
5.0%
Services & 
Materials 
10.8%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
5.9%
Capital Outlay 
0.3%

Charges for 
Services 
0.2%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 41

Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues

$        4,033,956 $        1,965,000 $        1,965,000 $        1,965,000 $                    ‐
          4,033,956
1,965,000
1,965,000
1,965,000                       ‐

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

        21,661,079
        21,661,079
        25,695,035

24,873,741
24,873,741
26,838,741

24,873,741
24,873,741
26,838,741

EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Total Expenses

              821,294
                     ‐
                     ‐
             821,294

870,000
19,492
            100,000
989,492

870,000
                    ‐
                    ‐
870,000

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

        24,873,741         25,849,249         25,968,741         27,063,741
        24,873,741
25,849,249
25,968,741
27,063,741
$      25,695,035 $     26,838,741 $     26,838,741 $      27,933,741

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Miscellaneous 
7.0%

Other 
Resources 
93.0%

42 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

25,968,741
25,968,741
        27,933,741

          1,095,000
          1,095,000
          1,095,000

870,000                       ‐
                     ‐
              (19,492)
                     ‐
      (100,000.00)
870,000             (119,492)

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Services & 
Materials 
3.1%

Other Uses 
96.9%

          1,214,492
          1,214,492
$       1,095,000

Central Regional Wastewater System Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$      19,994,090 $      22,158,919 $      20,497,025 $      22,492,213 $           333,294
            (100,992)
56,000
23,306
46,051                  (9,949)
                      ‐
              223,128
223,128                       ‐
            (223,128)
                      ‐
                      ‐
          1,785,270                       ‐
                      ‐
        19,893,098
22,438,047
22,528,729
22,538,264              100,217

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

          7,287,962
          7,287,962
        27,181,060

8,338,098
8,338,098
30,776,145

6,552,827
6,552,827
29,081,557

6,552,827          (1,785,270)
6,552,827          (1,785,270)
29,091,091          (1,685,053)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

          1,801,526
          1,000,117
          6,795,073
          4,327,604
          3,419,386
          1,494,284
                  4,972
        18,842,963

1,963,910
712,265
8,409,221
5,447,879
3,208,792
2,125,645
281,885
22,149,597

1,807,102
619,700
8,084,334
5,418,784
675,352
1,927,066
          3,996,391
22,528,729

2,014,449                 50,539
770,790                 58,525
7,197,019          (1,212,202)
4,647,149             (800,730)
206,215          (3,002,577)
1,922,771             (202,874)
          5,462,952           5,181,067
22,221,345                 71,748

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

          5,753,514
790,610
          2,584,584           7,835,938
          8,338,098
8,626,548
$      27,181,060 $     30,776,145

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other 
Resources
22.5%

          1,013,738
790,912                      302
          5,539,089           6,078,834          (1,757,104)
          6,552,827
6,869,746          (1,756,802)
      29,081,557 $      29,091,091 $     (1,685,053)

Other Uses 
23.6%

Miscellaneous
0.1%

Charges For 
Services
77.4%

Salaries & 
Fringe 
Wages                        
Benefits             
6.9%
Services & 
2.6%
Materials 
24.8%

Transfers Out 
18.8%
Debt Service 
6.6%

Capital Outlay 
0.7%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
16.0%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 43

Central Services Fund
(Information Technology Services)
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$        3,010,680 $      14,860,099 $      15,266,063 $      15,920,473 $        1,060,374
185,455
663,034
168,602
179,921             (483,113)
                      ‐
              181,405
113,094                       ‐
            (181,405)
              148,739               560,597               162,173               342,543             (218,054)
3,344,874
16,265,135
15,709,932
16,442,937              177,802

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

1,312,503
1,312,503
4,657,377

751,906
751,906
17,017,041

1,150,330
1,150,330
16,860,262

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

868,691
406,099
1,508,500
230,425
303,192
27,967
3,344,874

5,147,351
1,928,089
4,748,986
1,115,058
1,712,738
1,612,913
16,265,135

5,082,489
1,916,880
4,930,425
1,118,680
898,545
1,762,912
15,709,932

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated
 

              154,622
                36,521
               (45,104)
              428,688
        (1,303,925)
             907,000
             177,802

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other 
Resources
4.7%

Transfers Out 
14.6%
Capital Outlay 
2.4%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
8.9%
Charges For 
Services 
92.3%

44 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

5,301,973
1,964,610
4,703,882
1,543,746
             408,813
2,519,913
16,442,937

                      ‐
                54,588                 54,588                 54,588                       ‐
1,312,503
697,318
1,095,742
753,199                 55,881
1,312,503
751,906
1,150,330
807,787                 55,881
$        4,657,377 $     17,017,041 $     16,860,262 $      17,250,724 $          233,684

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
2.0%
Miscellaneous 
1.0%

807,787                 55,881
807,787                 55,881
17,250,724              233,684

Services & 
Materials 
27.3%

Other Uses
4.7%

Salaries & 
Wages 
30.7%

Fringe 
Benefits 
11.4%

City Insurance Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues
OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$      19,942,523 $      12,604,351 $      12,494,072 $      19,248,683 $        6,644,332
252,558
112,000
166,702
162,000                 50,000
                      ‐
                12,216
12,216                       ‐
               (12,216)
                      ‐
        11,143,894         10,437,676           2,059,796          (9,084,098)
20,195,081
23,872,461
23,110,665
21,470,479          (2,401,982)

11,831,734
11,831,734
32,026,815

2,451,506
2,451,506
26,323,967

3,157,724
3,157,724
26,268,390

1,097,928          (1,353,577)
          1,097,928          (1,353,577)
22,568,407          (3,755,560)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

733,527
908,499
902,355
941,214
348,566
354,619
344,302
368,201
262,638
333,780
291,118
413,442
17,086,684
22,129,509
21,426,836
19,656,589
                     ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    753
                      ‐
              146,054               146,054                 90,280
18,431,415
23,872,461
23,110,665
21,470,479

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

                      ‐
                12,216                 12,216                 12,216                       ‐
13,595,400
2,439,290
3,145,508
1,085,712          (1,353,577)
13,595,400
2,451,506
3,157,724
1,097,928          (1,353,577)
$      32,026,815 $     26,323,967 $     26,268,390 $      22,568,407 $     (3,755,560)

                32,715
                13,582
                79,663
         (2,472,920)
                    753
               (55,774)
         (2,401,982)

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other 
Appropriated  Resources 
4.9%
Fund Balance 
9.1%
Miscellaneous 
0.8%

Transfers
Out 
0.4%

Charges For 
Services 
85.2%

Salaries & 
Fringe Benefits 
Wages 
1.6%
Other Uses  4.2%
Services & 
4.9%
Materials 
1.8%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
87.1%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 45

Community Redevelopment Agency
Central Beach Area Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Intergovernment
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$        3,886,411 $        3,937,429 $        3,975,863 $        4,098,560 $           161,131
4,544
18,500
22,579
23,079                   4,579
2,664,867
2,149,779           2,149,779
2,218,659                 68,880
               (38,856)
                      ‐
                38,856                       ‐
                      ‐
6,555,822
6,144,564
6,148,221
6,340,298              195,734

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

                43,701               196,702               235,558
43,701              196,702              235,558
6,599,522
6,341,266
6,383,779

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfer Out to Capital Projects Fund
Transfer Out to Special Obligation Bonds
Transfer Out to Tax Increment Revenue Bonds
Total Expenses

328,345
141,082
254,684
263,623
                      ‐
4,833,303
                      ‐
              542,928
6,363,964

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

235,558               196,702           1,413,406           2,300,284           2,103,582
235,558              196,702           1,413,406           2,300,284           2,103,582
$       6,599,522 $       6,341,266 $       6,383,779 $        7,753,704 $       1,412,438

257,487
94,397
530,104
343,983
105,910
4,691,204
121,479
                      ‐
6,144,564

          1,216,704
          1,216,704
        1,412,438

          1,413,406
          1,413,406
7,753,704

256,761
264,286                   6,799
94,124
104,067                   9,670
528,894
271,352             (258,752)
344,803
632,465             288,482
105,910
70,910                (35,000)
3,639,881
4,035,251             (655,953)
                      ‐
                75,089                (46,390)
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
4,970,373
5,453,420             (691,144)

 

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other 
Resources  
18.2%

Other Uses 
29.6%

Inter‐
governmental 
52.9%

Other Sources  
28.6%
Miscellaneous  
0.3%

46 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Salaries & 
Wages 
3.4%

Fringe 
Benefits
1.3%

Services & 
Materials  Other 
3.5% Operating
Expenses
8.2%
Capital 
Outlay
0.9%

Transfer Out 
53.1%

Community Redevelopment Agency
Central City Area Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$                       16 $                      ‐
                 24,784                         ‐
                 24,800                         ‐

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

(24,694)                 (24,694)                 (24,704)                 (24,714)                         (20)
                (24,694)                 (24,694)                 (24,704)                 (24,714)                         (20)
                       106                 (24,694)                 (24,694)                 (24,704)                         (10)

EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Total Expenses

                 24,800                         ‐
                 24,800                         ‐

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

(24,694)                 (24,694)                 (24,704)                 (24,714)                         (20)
               (24,694)               (24,694)               (24,704)                (24,714)                        (20)
$                    106 $            (24,694) $            (24,694) $             (24,704) $                    (10)

$                      ‐
$                      ‐
$                      ‐
                         10                          10                          10
                         10                          10                          10

                         10                          10                          10
                         10                          10                          10

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 47

Community Redevelopment Agency
NW Progresso Flagler Heights Area Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Intergovernment Revenue
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$        3,116,204 $        3,232,164 $        3,232,164 $        3,396,849 $           164,685
29,217
16,763
16,763
16,763                            ‐
1,704,696
4,615,242           1,844,402
1,839,741          (2,775,501)
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
              286,878               286,878
4,850,117
7,864,169
5,172,554
5,540,231          (2,323,938)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

122,005               478,006               478,006               386,335                (91,671)
122,005               478,006               478,006               386,335               (91,671)
4,972,122
8,342,175
5,650,560
5,926,566        (2,415,608)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Transfer Out to Capital Projects Fund
Transfer Out to Special Obligation Bonds
Transfer Out to Tax Increment Revenue Bonds
Total Expenses

585,248
538,898
301,492
198,106
518,341
1,079,705
273,366
264,343
                      ‐
              530,000
                      ‐
                69,099
2,815,669
2,493,138
4,494,116
5,173,289

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

478,006           3,168,886               673,213               386,335          (2,782,551)
478,006           3,168,886              673,213              386,335          (2,782,551)
$       4,972,122 $       8,342,175 $       5,650,560 $        5,926,566 $     (2,415,608)

               (65,037)
               (13,294)
                66,451
             (26,653)
          2,925,000
               (26,387)
              961,862
3,092,237                              ‐
4,977,347
5,540,231              366,942
450,930
174,795
994,228
265,157

473,861
184,812
1,146,156
237,690
3,455,000
                42,712

 

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
4.8%

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other Uses  Salaries & Wages 
6.5%
Fringe Benefits 
8.0%
3.2%
Services & 
Materials 
19.3%

Other Resources 
6.5%

Other 
Sources
31.0%
Miscellaneous 
0.3%

48 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Inter
government
57.4%

Transfers 
Out
59.0%

Other Operating
Expenses 
4.0%

Drug Enforcement Agency Confiscated
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges for Service
Fines and Forfeits
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$           185,008 $                    ‐
$                    ‐
$                    ‐
             472,045                      ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
               23,221                      ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                67,595
1,272,753
1,309,787
1,889,938
747,869
1,272,753
1,309,787
1,889,938

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

$                    ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
              617,185
             617,185

1,919,971                 30,033          (1,926,972)
3,229,758           1,957,005
3,229,758           1,957,005           1,919,971
30,033          (1,926,972)
3,977,627
3,229,758
3,229,758
1,919,971         (1,309,787)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Total Expenses

              349,834
              193,142
              137,041
                     ‐
                67,852
             747,869

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

          3,229,758           1,957,005           1,919,971                 30,033          (1,926,972)
3,229,758
1,957,005           1,919,971
30,033          (1,926,972)
$        3,977,627 $       3,229,758 $       3,229,758 $        1,919,971 $     (1,309,787)

              371,090
              217,203
              209,705
               30,282
              444,473
1,272,753

              408,124
              217,203
              209,705
               30,282
              444,473
1,309,787

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

                  2,448
               (80,803)
                     295
              (10,282)
              705,528
             617,185

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other 
Resources 
1.6%
Services & 
Materials 
27.3%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
98.4%

              373,538
              136,400
              210,000
               20,000
          1,150,000
1,889,938

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
2.5%

Other Uses 
4.0%
Salaries & 
Wages 
48.5%

Fringe Benefits 
17.7%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 49

Housing & Community Development Grants Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Intergovernment Revenue
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$      12,694,562 $      11,788,318 $      11,732,668 $      10,469,854 $       (1,318,464)
          1,457,265               845,300                       ‐
                      ‐
            (845,300)
              704,777               804,777                       ‐
                      ‐
            (804,777)
        14,856,604
13,438,395
11,732,668
10,469,854          (2,968,541)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

                      ‐
                      ‐
        14,856,604

            (222,603)
(222,603)
13,215,792

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Grant Services
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

836,480
368,497
          8,257,742
(36,416)
1,344,946
          3,380,578
              122,603
        14,274,430

                      ‐
                      ‐
                     509
                      ‐
                      ‐
        13,085,547
              352,339
        13,438,395

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

582,174             (222,603)               583,673               583,673               806,276
             582,174             (222,603)              583,673              583,673              806,276
$      14,856,604 $     13,215,792 $     12,314,842 $      11,053,527 $     (2,162,265)

FY 2014  Adopted Revenues

              541,588
              252,796
              170,776
                18,701
                      ‐
        10,747,308
                      ‐
        11,731,169

Inter
government 
Revenue
94.7%

583,673               806,276
             583,673              806,276
11,053,527          (2,162,265)

              794,569
              234,691
              130,720
                13,360
                      ‐
          8,872,414
              424,100
        10,469,854

              794,569
              234,691
              130,212
                13,360
                           ‐
         (4,213,133)
                71,761
         (2,968,541)

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses
Total Other 
Uses 
Transfers Out  5.3%
3.8%

Total Other 
Resources 
5.3%

50 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

582,174
582,174
12,314,842

Salaries & 
Services & 
Wages  Fringe Benefits  Materials 
7.2%
1.2%
2.1%
Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
0.1%

Grant Services 
80.3%

Parking System Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Fines & Forfeits
Misc Revenues
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

$       10,192,908 $       10,671,427 $       10,829,028 $       10,762,933 $               91,506
2,492,110
2,807,000             2,500,000
2,807,000                         ‐
369,581
357,749              264,423
284,197               (73,552)
                       ‐
             325,380              280,380                        ‐
             (325,380)
                        ‐
            6,512,713             1,528,459             1,823,536           (4,689,177)
13,054,599
20,674,269
15,402,290
15,677,666           (4,996,603)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

12,006,196
12,006,196
25,060,795

6,798,177
6,798,177
27,472,446

11,782,431
11,782,431
27,184,721

9,958,895             3,160,719
9,958,895            3,160,719
25,636,561           (1,835,885)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

3,128,628
1,777,018
1,964,319
3,130,904
40,603
1,708,433
11,749,905

3,660,971
1,432,213
4,783,049
4,984,619
4,136,821
1,676,596
20,674,269

            3,438,552
            1,326,593
            3,163,616
            5,191,007
               845,925
          1,436,596
15,402,290

3,693,220                  32,249
1,485,186                  52,973
3,448,270           (1,334,779)
5,411,989                427,370
276,329           (3,860,492)
1,362,672              (313,924)
15,677,666         (4,996,603)

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

            3,034,561
3,518,741           3,518,741            3,667,241              148,500
         10,276,329             3,279,435             8,263,691             6,291,654             3,012,219
13,310,890
6,798,176        11,782,431
9,958,895          3,160,719
$       25,060,795 $      27,472,446 $      27,184,721 $       25,636,561 $       (1,835,885)

 

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Charges For 
Services 42.0%

Other 
Resources 
38.9%

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses
Salaries & 
Wages
14.4%

Other Uses
38.8%

Fringe Benefits
5.8%

Services & 
Materials
13.5%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
7.1%

Misc Revenues 
1.1%

Fines & Forfeits 
10.9%

Transfers Out
5.3%

Capital Outlay
1.1%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
21.1%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 51

Police Confiscation Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges for Services
Fines and Forfeits
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues
OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$              46,252 $                    ‐
$                    ‐
$                    ‐
279,143                       ‐
              290,270               300,500
13,252                       ‐
                12,000                 12,000
244,854
591,770
257,109
507,227
583,501
591,770
559,379
819,727

$                    ‐
              300,500
                12,000
               (84,543)
             227,957

812,646               220,876               555,537                 48,310             (172,566)
812,646              220,876              555,537
48,310             (172,566)
1,396,147
812,646
1,114,916
868,037                55,391

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

178,646
73,553
99,802
231,500
                      ‐
                      ‐
583,501

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

              812,646               220,876               555,537                 48,310             (172,566)
812,646
220,876              555,537
48,310             (172,566)
$        1,396,147 $          812,646 $       1,114,916 $           868,037 $            55,391

206,074
206,613
66,028
61,544
203,776
183,031
95,683
87,983
                      ‐
0
20,209                 20,208
591,770
559,379

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other 
Resources 
5.6%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
58.4%

52 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

239,146
78,179
216,814
71,000
200,000
14,588
819,727

                33,072
                12,151
                13,038
              (24,683)
              200,000
                 (5,621)
             227,957

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Fines and 
Forfeits 
34.6%

Transfers Out 
1.7%
Capital Outlay 
23.0%

Miscellaneous 
1.4%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
8.2%

Other Uses 
5.6%

Salaries & 
Wages 
27.5%

Services & 
Materials 
25.0%

Fringe 
Benefits
9.0%

Sanitation Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues
OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014 
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

$      18,786,777 $      19,105,722 $      18,674,809 $      15,059,466 $       (4,046,256)
                92,470                 44,000           4,164,436               102,074                 58,074
                      ‐
          2,415,852
2,415,852           2,055,000             (360,852)
                13,847                       ‐
                      ‐
          3,159,731           3,159,731
18,893,094
21,565,574
25,255,097
20,376,271          (1,189,303)

4,124,635
4,124,635
23,017,729

4,124,635
4,124,635
25,690,209

4,124,635
4,124,635
29,379,732

          5,951,254
5,951,254
26,327,525

 
          1,826,619
          1,826,619
             637,316

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

2,712,042
1,923,844
10,899,860
3,322,554
34,794
                      ‐
18,893,094

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

2,465,398
4,402,735           6,818,587           4,440,735                 38,000
1,659,237
462,218           2,292,398           1,510,519           1,048,300
4,124,635
4,864,953           9,110,985
5,951,254           1,086,300
$      23,017,729 $     25,690,209 $     29,379,732 $      26,327,525 $          637,316

3,578,245
3,527,335
4,547,759               969,514
1,605,858
1,465,485
2,128,225               522,367
11,304,189
10,696,463
9,739,253          (1,564,936)
3,962,445
3,922,960
2,625,510          (1,336,935)
            (303,490)                       ‐
              916,429           1,219,919
678,009
656,504
419,095             (258,914)
20,825,256
20,268,747
20,376,271             (448,985)

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues 

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other 
Resources
22.6%

Other Uses
23.0%

Salaries & 
Wages 
17.0%

Transfers Out
2.0%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance
12.0%
Other Sources
7.8%

Fringe 
Benefits 
8.0%

Capital
Outlay
3.0%

Miscellaneous
0.4%

Charges For 
Services
57.2%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
10.0%

Services & 
Materials
37.0%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 53

School Crossing Guards Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Fines & Forfeits
Total Revenues

$                    ‐
                      ‐

$           800,000 $           800,000 $           800,000 $                    ‐
             800,000              800,008              800,000                       ‐

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐

                      ‐
                      ‐
                          8                           8
                      ‐
                      ‐
                          8                           8
800,000
800,008
800,008                           8

EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Total Expenses

                      ‐
                      ‐

              800,000               800,000               800,000                       ‐
800,000
800,000
800,000                       ‐

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

                      ‐
                      ‐
$                    ‐

                      ‐
                          8                           8                           8
                      ‐
                          8                           8                           8
$           800,000 $           800,008 $           800,008 $                       8

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Fines & Forfeits 
100.0%

54 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Services & 
Materials 
100.0%

Self-Insured Health Benefits Fund
FY 2012
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

$      17,797,436 $      17,200,000 $      17,397,100 $      18,543,600 $        1,343,600
445,955
12,000
781,000
60,000                 48,000
4,629,873
2,585,426
402,400
1,272,900          (1,312,526)
22,873,264
19,797,426
18,580,500
19,876,500                 79,074

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources

(427,296)
(427,296)
                     ‐

Due To/From General Fund

(3,012,722)
(3,012,722)

(829,696)
(829,696)

                    ‐

(2,102,596)               910,126
(2,102,596)              910,126
         2,104,890

         2,104,890
          3,094,090

Total Resources Available

22,445,968

16,784,704

17,750,804

19,878,794

EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Total Expenses

66,807
22,806,457
22,873,264

230,241
19,567,186
19,797,426

228,000
18,352,500
18,580,500

143,768                (86,473)
19,732,732               165,546
19,876,500                 79,074

OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

(427,296)
(3,012,722)
(829,696)
2,294           3,015,016
(427,296)
(3,012,722)
(829,696)
2,294           3,015,016
$      22,445,968 $     16,784,704 $     17,750,804 $      19,878,794 $        3,094,090

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
7.1%

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other 
Resources 
‐11.8%

Services & 
Materials 
0.7%

Miscellaneous 
0.3%

Charges For 
Services 
104.4%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses 
99.3%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 55

Stormwater Fund
FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014        
 Dollar
Adopted
 Difference 

REVENUES
Intergovt Revenue
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$                    ‐
$          (143,090) $                    ‐
$                    ‐
          5,350,351
5,781,000
5,570,901
5,886,528
                79,306
150,000
129,091
62,410
                      ‐
          1,082,136
1,082,136                       ‐
                      ‐
2,064,209
2,243,764
1,559,971
          5,429,657
8,934,255
9,025,892
7,508,909

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

        13,258,480
        13,258,480
        18,688,137

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

          1,021,882
1,410,111
              602,583
599,656
              608,747
1,159,024
          1,584,147
2,160,324
              192,658           3,329,827
                  2,870                       ‐
                      ‐
              275,312
          4,012,887
8,934,255

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

                      ‐
          1,082,136           1,082,136               427,136             (655,000)
14,675,250
11,528,905         11,349,350
10,444,379          (1,084,526)
        14,675,250
12,611,041         12,431,486
10,871,515          (1,739,526)
$      18,688,137 $     21,545,296 $     21,457,378 $      18,380,424 $      (3,164,872)

12,611,041
12,611,041
21,545,296

10,871,515          (1,739,526)
10,871,515          (1,739,526)
18,380,424         (3,164,872)

1,360,229
1,740,898               330,787
577,756
734,408               134,752
739,225
1,036,627             (122,397)
2,151,866
1,800,730             (359,594)
                      ‐
              726,068          (2,603,759)
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
          4,196,816           1,470,178           1,194,866
9,025,892
7,508,909          (1,425,346)

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Miscellaneous 
0.5%

12,431,486
12,431,486
21,457,378

$           143,090
              105,528
               (87,590)
         (1,082,136)
            (504,238)
         (1,425,346)

Salaries & 
Wages
9.5%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
12.5%

Fringe 
Benefits
4.0% Services & 
Materials
5.6%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
9.8%

Other 
Resources 
87.0%

56 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Other Uses
59.1%

Capital 
Outlay
4.0%
Transfers Out
8.0%

Sunrise Key Safe Neighborhood District Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Taxes
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014  
Adopted

Dollar
 Difference

$              70,125 $              71,289 $              57,799 $              74,177 $                2,888
7,119
300
208
210                       (90)
                      ‐
7,911
21,493
613                  (7,298)
77,245
79,500
79,500
75,000                  (4,500)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available
EXPENDITURES
Services & Materials
Total Expenses
OTHER USES
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

89,174
89,174
166,419

84,857
84,857
164,357

71,275
71,275
150,775

70,662                (14,195)
70,662               (14,195)
145,662               (18,695)

73,651
73,651

79,500
79,500

79,500
79,500

75,000                  (4,500)
75,000                  (4,500)

92,768
84,857
71,275
70,662                (14,195)
92,768
84,857
71,275
70,662               (14,195)
$           166,419 $           164,357 $           150,775 $           145,662 $            (18,695)

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses

Other 
Resources 
48.5%

Other Uses 
48.5%

Taxes 
51.0%

Appropriated 
Fund Balance 
0.4%

Miscellaneous

Services & 
Materials 
51.5%

0.1%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 57

Vehicle Rental (Fleet) Fund
FY 2012 
Actual
REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014 
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

$      19,505,206 $      18,200,000 $      16,509,677 $      16,846,376 $       (1,353,624)
122,225
146,100
55,965
146,900                      800
5,442,366
10,433,056
10,180,104                       ‐
       (10,433,056)
25,069,797
28,779,156
26,745,746
16,993,276       (11,785,880)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

17,722,131
17,722,131
42,791,928

7,289,075
7,289,075
36,068,231

7,542,027
7,542,027
34,287,773

          7,542,027               252,952
7,542,027              252,952
24,535,303       (11,532,928)

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
1
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

210,984
96,721
10,563,794
479,704
2,238,157
7,480,437
4,000,000
25,069,797

246,628
87,682
12,495,355
1,881,055
5,612,634
                      ‐
          8,455,801
28,779,156

265,337
112,844
10,432,818
1,866,312
5,612,634
                      ‐
8,455,801
26,745,746

183,046                (63,582)
77,920                  (9,762)
11,250,795          (1,244,560)
531,372          (1,349,683)
3,233,545          (2,379,089)
                      ‐
                      ‐
31,562          (8,424,239)
15,308,240       (13,470,916)

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated
1

15,290,995
14,492,721
6,211,526
8,797,546          (5,695,175)
2,431,136          (7,203,646)
1,330,501               429,517           7,633,163
17,722,131
7,289,075
7,542,027
9,227,063           1,937,988
$      42,791,928 $     36,068,231 $     34,287,773 $      24,535,303 $    (11,532,928)

Fund reserves returned to the proprietary funds in FY 2013 in the amount of $8.4MM for proper accounting purposes.

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues

Other 
Resources
30.7%

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses
Salaries & 
Wages 
0.7%
Other Uses
37.6%

Miscellaneous 
0.6%
Charges For 
Services 
68.7%

58 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fringe Benefits 
0.3%

Transfers Out
0.1%
Capital Outlay 
13.2%

Other Operating 
Expenses 
2.2%

Services & 
Materials 
45.9%

Water & Sewer Fund
FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended

FY 2013
Estimate

FY 2014 
Adopted

 Dollar
 Difference 

REVENUES
Charges For Services
Miscellaneous
Other Sources
Appropriated Fund Balance
Total Revenues

$      85,495,243 $      90,814,672 $      92,695,086 $      95,341,082 $        4,526,410
4,451,855
5,854,219
4,215,105
4,674,162          (1,180,057)
3,504,373
5,261,318           5,261,317                       ‐
         (5,261,318)
3,559,352
14,165,701
11,637,014
4,539,370          (9,626,331)
97,010,823
116,095,910
113,808,522
104,554,614       (11,541,296)

OTHER RESOURCES
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves 
Total Other Resources
Total Resources Available

        50,629,459
        50,629,459
      147,640,282

36,463,758
36,463,758
152,559,668

EXPENDITURES
Salaries & Wages
Fringe Benefits
Services & Materials
Other Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Transfers Out
Total Expenses

16,960,505
9,553,375
15,870,547
21,926,633
1,592,895
29,392,868
1,714,000
97,010,823

17,133,653
7,001,983
19,672,433
27,311,120
943,338
31,072,639
12,960,746
116,095,910

OTHER USES
Reserves 
Year End Balance
Total Other Uses
Total Resources Allocated

28,858,442
21,771,017
50,629,459
$   147,640,282

32,835,606
3,628,152
36,463,758
$  152,559,668

38,992,445
38,992,445
152,800,967

        34,453,075          (2,010,683)
34,453,075          (2,010,683)
139,007,689       (13,551,979)

16,723,177
18,201,272
6,674,074
8,023,134
16,580,691
15,477,071
27,906,351
27,613,833
680,989
1,833,389
32,282,494
31,194,363
        12,960,746           2,211,552
113,808,522       104,554,614

          1,067,619
          1,021,152
        (4,195,362)
              302,713
              890,051
              121,724
       (10,749,194)
      (11,541,296)

        36,802,506         31,824,671          (1,010,935)
          2,189,939           2,628,404             (999,748)
        38,992,445         34,453,075          (2,010,683)
$  152,800,967 $   139,007,689 $    (13,551,979)
 

FY 2014 Adopted Expenses 

FY 2014 Adopted Revenues
Other 
Resources
24.8%
Appropriated
Fund
Balance
3.3%

Salaries & 
Wages
13.1%

Other Uses
24.8%
Transfers 
Out
1.6%

Fringe Benefits
5.8%
Services & 
Materials
11.1%

Miscellaneous
3.4%
Charges For  Debt Service
Services
22.4%
68.6%

Capital Outlay
1.3%

Other 
Operating 
Expenses
19.9%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 59

Financial Policies
GENERAL FINANCIAL POLICIES
The purpose is to provide overall financial
guidance for the City of Fort Lauderdale, and
serve as a basis for future financial
decision-making.

Fund Balance Levels and Appropriation of
Fund Balance


General Guidelines









Current, recurring revenues equal
current, on-going expenses (Balanced
Budget).
One-time revenues can be used to build
up the un-assigned fund balance or be
used for truly one-time expenses without
impacting service levels.
Any year-end surplus should be directed
to the un-assigned fund balance and not
used to finance recurring expenses in the
following fiscal year.
Capital improvements should be financed
from current revenues, but may be
financed by prudent use of debt
instruments that provide for a pay-back
period, which does not exceed the life of
the improvement. Once the City has
borrowed for such improvements, debt
service becomes a current expense to be
covered by recurring revenue.
Internal service funds are used by the City
to provide services within the City
organization. Examples include fleet, print
shop, radio communications, telephones
and insurance. Charges to City
departments should be set to cover all
costs. They should have sufficient
reserves to cover fluctuations or
long-term liabilities such as vehicle
replacement and insurance claims.

60 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget





Unrestricted Fund Balance is defined as
the total of committed fund balance,
assigned fund balance, and unassigned
fund balance, which include only
resources without a constraint on
spending or for which the constraint on
spending is imposed by the City.
Maintaining a prudent level of
unrestricted fund balance is necessary to
protect the City against reducing service
levels, emergencies or natural disasters,
unanticipated economic downturns, or
unpredicted one-time expenditures.
The
Commission
adopted
a
recommendation from the Budget
Advisory Board to maintain the
unrestricted fund balance for the General
Fund at a level that is equivalent to two
(2) months of operating expenditures and
required transfers. Should the projected
or actual unrestricted fund balance fall
below this minimum, a plan will be
submitted for consideration to achieve
the minimum level within a three-year
period. This plan will include a
combination of cost reductions, revenue
enhancements, and/or service reductions
and should be submitted within 30 days
of recognition of the fund shortfall. Use of
fund balance below the recommended
threshold is permitted only in case of an
emergency, or in the case of an
unanticipated economic downturn, which
causes a material loss of revenues.
Non-recurring revenues shall not be used
to balance the annual budget for
recurring expenses.

Financial Policies
Funding of Self Insurance Fund




City managed, self-insured programs are
to be funded through fees recovered
through the user departments including
administrative costs and reserves. These
self-insurance programs include workers’
compensation, certain health plans, police
and employment practices and general
liability.
It is the policy of the City that the
self-insured programs of the City be fully
funded. An actuarial study will be
performed each year. Any current or
future deficits that may occur in the
workers’ compensation or general liability
programs will require a financial plan
which will require that the fund deficit be
eliminated within the next three years.
The plan will include options such as
increased department contributions,
transfer of available equity reserves from
other self-insurance programs or transfers
from other funds available as a means to
fund the deficit.





Community Investment Plan (CIP)




The City currently prepares a 5-year
Community Investment Plan with each
annual budget. The plan serves as a
general planning guide for the
construction of general purpose and
utility facility improvements in the City.
This provides the City Commission with an
assessment of capital needs. Annual
contributions to this program from the
General Fund are required to maintain
facility and infrastructure requirements.
It is the policy of the City that annual
contributions to this program from the
General Fund are at a minimum of 1% of
the total General Fund expenses.
Additional contributions may be made



during the fiscal year through budget
amendments as desired projects and
funding sources become available.
However, additional funding from the
General Fund will not be permitted if the
use of fund balance causes the
unrestricted fund balance to fall below
the minimum requirement. The City
Manager may pursue alternate methods
of funding these projects through federal,
state, or local grants, contributions from
developers and other innovative financial
options (public/private partnerships).
The construction of new facilities or
buildings and other types of infrastructure
or the annexation of property may
require additional future operating costs
to staff and maintain the facility or
property. The costs of staffing and
maintaining the facility or property and
any associated revenues should be
considered prior to construction of the
facility or annexation of the property.
It is the policy of the City that all capital
projects or other long-range projects
(annexation of property, tax increment
areas, etc.) contain economic evaluation
providing information on the potential
operating impacts of the project. The
evaluation should include any savings or
incremental revenue resulting from the
project, as well as any new costs.
No capital project should be funded
unless an economic evaluation has been
completed and the necessary funds can
be reasonably assumed to be available
when needed.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 61

Financial Policies
adequate, costs are justified, and reserve
balances are sufficient to provide for
future operations. The City Commission
recently adopted a policy to conduct an
analysis and review the user fees on a
bi-annual basis.

Operating Capital Outlay




Capital outlay needs can also be provided
through department line item budgets.
This type of capital expenditure includes
equipment replacement, hardware and
software needs and other minor facility or
building improvements.
It is the policy of the City to fund
operating capital needs from current
revenues. The City will include in the
operating budget those operating capital
needs that are considered “critical” to
functional operations of City services.
Financing the purchase through bonds,
notes or an interfund advance is an
option only if the debt service required to
pay back the debt can be made from
current revenues (does not require the
use of fund balance in future years).

Enterprise Funds




The City provides a wide variety of
services to the residents and visitors
including water and sewer, solid waste,
storm water, parking facilities, and an
executive airport. The cost of these
services approximates 42% of the City’s
annual
expenditures.
The
City
Commission establishes rates for the use
of these services and periodically adjusts
the rates based upon user fee rate
analyses.
It is the policy of the City in regards to
enterprise funds to establish user fees at
an amount sufficient to cover all costs,
including indirect costs and any debt
service related to investment in these
facilities, and to provide for reasonable
reserve levels. The City Manager is
responsible for conducting periodic
reviews of the financial performance of
these funds to ensure user fees are

62 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

DEBT POLICIES
The City has established policies regarding the
utilization of debt instruments. The principal
use of debt by the City has been for making
capital expenditures. Because the use of
public capital stretches over many years, it is
appropriate that those who enjoy the
benefits should also pay the costs.
The City Commission has issued debt for
recapitalization of existing assets, most of the
Water and Sewer Master Plan, the
replacement of nine existing fire stations and
the addition of one new fire station.
The solid financial position of the City along
with application of the most current financial
management practices has permitted the City
to obtain very favorable bond ratings and,
consequently, lower interest rates.
The City has adopted the following policy
statements as guidelines for the use of debt:





No borrowing of short-term debt for
support of routine operations is to be
used unless borrowing can be obtained at
a lower rate of interest than invested
funds and funds are not available for the
routine operations.
Debt payment shall not exceed the
anticipated useful life of an improvement
and in no case exceed 30 years.
Bond issues shall be scheduled to level
annual debt service requirements so that
borrowing costs are minimized. This may

Financial Policies



be modified based on the express
purpose of spreading improvement costs
equally over a long period of time so that
future citizens become responsible for
portions of the cost.
With each bond offering and at least
annually, the City shall fully disclose its
financial position and fiscal management
practices.

The following policy statements are operating
guidelines for the City of Fort Lauderdale for
the level of debt for all direct
non-self-supported debt:




Direct, non-self-supported debt shall not
exceed $750 per capita, which is
equivalent to approximately $124MM.
Direct,
non-self-supported
and
overlapping debt shall not exceed 5% of
assessed valuation.
Average annual bond maturities shall not
exceed 15 years.

AMENDMENT/TRANSFER POLICIES
The City’s annual operating budget is
approved by the City Commission at the fund
and department level. Any change in the
budget, change between departments, or a
change between funds is considered an
amendment and must be approved by the
City Commission. The City Commission also
approves all allocations from General Fund
Contingencies.
Budget Transfers are changes to the budget
at the department/fund level. This process
provides for ongoing adjustments to the
operating budget and enhance re-porting and
control over expenditure/revenue items but
does not impact the bottom line adopted
budget for that department. The City
Manager has the delegated authority to
approve Budget Transfers.

BOND RATINGS
A summary of the City’s bond ratings for
outstanding long-term debt is as follows:
LYNDAFLLLLLL
General Obligation
Moody’s: Aa1
Standard & Poor’s: AA
Water & Sewer Bonds
Moody’s: Aa1
Standard & Poor’s: AA+
General Obligation Bonds are secured by the
full faith and credit of the City. The
outstanding General Obligation Bonds will be
repaid from ad valorem taxes. Tax increment
bonds are secured by property taxes.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 63

64 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Financials
For FY 2014, the all funds Adopted Budget
including
transfers
and
reserves
are
$832,277,622. The following pages reflect this
budget information in tables and graphic format.
The General Fund summary for FY 2014 is
presented showing revenues by source,
expenditures by department, transfers, reserves,
and balances. In addition, a similar table is
included for FY 2013 for comparative purposes.
These are followed by detailed information, as
listed below, regarding resources, expenditures,
transfers, reserves, and balances. Where
applicable,
information
includes
actual
expenditures and revenues for FY 2012 Actual,
FY 2013 Amended Budget, and then the FY 2014
Adopted Budget. The final column in the tables
compares the FY 2014 Adopted Budget to the
FY 2013 Amended Budget.

The FY 2014 Adopted Budget, including
balances and reserves for the General Fund
is $345,277,771. This amount includes a
$4.8 million transfer to the General Capital
Projects Fund and $1.0 million reserved for
Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB).

General Fund


Table of General Fund Revenues by
Object.



Table of General Fund Expenditures by
Object.



Comparative schedule including FY 2012
Actual, FY 2013 Amended, and FY 2014
Adopted Budget for the General Fund
revenues and expenditures rolled up.

The detailed information provided in this section
includes:



Adopted transfers for FY 2014.

All Funds



Chart reflecting trends in ending General
Fund Balance.



Schedule of Debt Service Requirements.



FY 2014 comprehensive schedule of all
fund revenues, expenditures, and
balances.



FY 2013 comprehensive schedule of all
fund revenues, expenditures, and
balances.



Comparative schedule including FY 2012
Actual, FY 2013 Amended, and FY 2014
Adopted



Budget for all funds revenues and
expenditures rolled up.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 65

FY 2014 Adopted All Funds Budget
 

Water &
Sewer/
Central
Regional
Wastewater

General
Fund
Projected Cash Balances Brought Forward:
Prior Year Operating Balance
$
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Total Balances Brought Forward
 

 
             37,760,180         11,919,056
               4,457,240                        ‐
               4,000,000                        ‐
             13,274,563                        ‐
                  635,183         33,626,216
            60,127,166         45,545,272

Estimated Revenues:
Taxes:
Millage
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Operating          4.1193
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Debt Service      0.2071
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Sunrise Key        1.0000
Sales and Use Tax
Franchise Fees
Utility Service Taxes
Licenses and Permits
Intergovernmental 
Charges for Services
Fines and Forfeitures
Other
Total Revenues
 

             97,569,296
                           ‐
                           ‐
               4,882,276
             15,228,206
             36,592,965
               2,924,286
             17,749,691
             26,036,670
               4,799,918
             78,384,413
          284,167,721

Debt Service
Funds

Building
Funds

                       ‐
          14,035,279
                       ‐
                         ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
         15,395,241             2,110,335
        15,395,241         16,145,614

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
           4,851,907
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
      117,833,295                        ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
           4,720,213                        ‐
      122,553,508            4,851,907

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
          15,314,804
                         ‐
                  56,515
                         ‐
                119,949
          15,491,268

Cemetery
Perpetual
Care

Sanitation

                       ‐
          4,708,250
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
        25,968,741           4,402,735
      25,968,741         9,110,985

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
          1,965,000
          1,965,000

Parking
           8,263,690
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
           3,518,741
       11,782,431

Vehicle
Rental

Airport

           1,330,501                      ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
           6,211,526        16,753,030
           7,542,027      16,753,030

City
Insurance
           3,145,508
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                 12,216
         3,157,724

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
        15,059,466          10,762,933          16,846,376          3,591,685          19,248,683
                       ‐
           2,807,000                        ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
              102,074                284,197                146,900          3,925,098                162,000
        15,161,540          13,854,130          16,993,276          7,516,783          19,410,683

Total Transfers and Other Sources

 

                  982,884

                       ‐

         29,870,153                          ‐

                       ‐

          2,055,000

                       ‐

                       ‐

                     ‐

                       ‐

Due To/From General Fund

 

                           ‐

                       ‐

                       ‐

                         ‐

                       ‐

                       ‐

                       ‐

                       ‐

                     ‐

                       ‐

          285,150,605

      122,553,508

         34,722,060

          15,491,268

          1,965,000

        17,216,540

         13,854,130

         16,993,276

         7,516,783

         19,410,683

$           345,277,771

      168,098,780

         50,117,301

          31,636,882

        27,933,741

        26,327,525

         25,636,561

         24,535,303        24,269,813

         22,568,407

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
         15,276,678

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
         21,380,199
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
         21,380,199

Total Revenues and Other Sources
TOTAL RESOURCES AVAILABLE

 
Expenditures by Department:
City Attorney
City Auditor
City Clerk
City Commission
City Manager
Finance
Fire‐Rescue
Human Resources
Information Technology Services
Parks and Recreation
Police
Public Works
Sustainable Development
Transportation & Mobility
Debt Service
Other General Government
Total Operating Expenditures

$                3,427,604
                  841,791
                  897,147
               1,097,238
               4,623,459
               6,885,623
             63,777,748
               2,423,782
                           ‐
             38,816,281
             93,989,773
               5,029,212
               7,541,021
               1,912,667
                           ‐
             16,711,983
            247,975,329

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
        85,984,321
                       ‐
                       ‐
        33,117,134
                       ‐
      119,101,455

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
        34,632,541
                       ‐
         34,632,541

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
          10,804,251
                         ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
          10,804,251

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
              870,000
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
              870,000

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
        10,635,592
                       ‐
          9,321,584
                       ‐
                       ‐
                     ‐
                       ‐
        19,957,176

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
         14,314,994
                      ‐
                       ‐
         14,314,994

         15,276,678

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
         7,170,848
                   ‐
                     ‐
         7,170,848

Other Resources Allocated:
Required Transfers Out
Discretionary Transfers Out
Capital Maintenance Transfers Out
Capital Transfers Out
Total Other Resources

             28,642,712
               2,718,199
               2,095,875
               2,713,600
              36,170,386

           2,385,793
                       ‐
                       ‐
           5,288,711
          7,674,504

                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐

          1,443,735
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
          1,443,735

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐

            419,095
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
            419,095

             362,672
                      ‐
                      ‐
         1,000,000
         1,362,672

                 31,562
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                 31,562

          103,663
                   ‐
                   ‐
       2,064,500
       2,168,163

               90,280
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
               90,280

 

          284,145,715

      126,775,959

        34,632,541

        12,247,986

            870,000

      20,376,271

       15,677,666

         15,308,240

       9,339,011

       21,470,479

               2,104,890

                       ‐

                      ‐

                       ‐

                     ‐

                     ‐

                      ‐

                       ‐

                   ‐

                     ‐

        17,228,683
                       ‐
                       ‐
          2,160,213
        19,388,896

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
      27,063,741
      27,063,741

        1,510,519
                     ‐
                     ‐
        4,440,735
        5,951,254

         6,291,654                429,517
                      ‐
                       ‐
                      ‐
                       ‐
         3,667,241            8,797,546
         9,958,895            9,227,063

                   ‐
                   ‐
                   ‐
     14,930,802
     14,930,802

         1,085,712
                     ‐
                     ‐
               12,216
         1,097,928

Total Expenditures Allocated
Due To/From Health Benefits Fund
Projected Balances and Reserves:
Anticipated Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Other
Total Balances and Reserves

             48,934,743            8,707,238
               4,457,240                        ‐
               5,000,000                        ‐
                  635,183         32,615,583
              59,027,166         41,322,821

                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
        15,484,760
        15,484,760

TOTAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED

$           345,277,771

         50,117,301           31,636,882         27,933,741         26,327,525          25,636,561          24,535,303

66 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

      168,098,780

       24,269,813          22,568,407

FY 2014 Adopted All Funds Budget
 

Self-Insured
Health Benefits

Stormwater

Central
Services

Projected Cash Balances Brought Forward:
Prior Year Operating Balance
$                    (829,696)
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
                             ‐
Reserves ‐ OPEB
                             ‐
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
                             ‐
Reserves ‐ Other
                             ‐
Total Balances Brought Forward
                     (829,696)

 
        11,349,350
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
          1,082,136
        12,431,486

        1,095,742
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
              54,588
        1,150,330

Estimated Revenues:
Taxes:
Millage
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Operating            4.1193
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Debt Service       0.2071
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Sunrise Key         1.0000
Sales and Use Tax
Franchise Fees
Utility Service Taxes
Licenses and Permits
Intergovernmental 
Charges for Services
Fines and Forfeitures
Other
Total Revenues
 

                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
               18,543,600
                             ‐
                      60,000
               18,603,600

Beach
Community
Housing &
Police
Business
Redevelopment Community Confiscation Improvement
Agency
Development
Funds
District
                  2,061,915
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                 2,061,915

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                583,673
               583,673

           2,475,508
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
          2,475,508

                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
          5,886,528
                      ‐
               62,410
          5,948,938

                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                  7,495,409
                              ‐
                              ‐
            179,921                         39,842
      16,100,394                   7,535,251

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
           10,469,854
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
           10,469,854

                       ‐

                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
      15,920,473

                 381,511
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                381,511

Arts &
Science
District
Garage
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐

                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
         899,584
              300,500                          ‐
                 ‐
                12,000                  641,730                  ‐
              312,500                  641,730          899,584

School
Crossing
Guard

Sunrise
Key

Total
Operating
Funds

                    8
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                    8

      71,275
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
    71,275

           97,768,077
             4,457,240
             4,000,000
           13,274,563
         110,354,361
       229,854,241

                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
        800,000
                ‐
        800,000

             ‐
             ‐
      74,177
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
            210
      74,387

           97,569,296
             4,851,907
                   74,177
             4,882,276
           15,228,206
           36,592,965
           18,239,090
           35,714,954
         250,685,808
             8,707,418
           90,805,957
         563,352,054

Total Transfers and Other Sources

 

                             ‐

                      ‐

                    ‐

                  4,058,400                          ‐

Due To/From General Fund

 

                 2,104,890                       ‐

                    ‐

                              ‐

               20,708,490           5,948,938

      16,100,394                 11,593,651            10,469,854               312,500                  641,730          899,584         800,000

Total Revenues and Other Sources

                         ‐

                       ‐

                         ‐

                 ‐

                ‐

             ‐

           36,966,437

                         ‐

                 ‐

                ‐

             ‐

             2,104,890

      74,387          602,423,381

TOTAL RESOURCES AVAILABLE

$                19,878,794         18,380,424

      17,250,724                 13,655,566            11,053,527            2,788,008

             1,023,241          899,584         800,008     145,662          832,277,622

Expenditures by Department:
City Attorney
City Auditor
City Clerk
City Commission
City Manager
Finance
Fire‐Rescue
Human Resources
Information Technology Services
Parks and Recreation
Police
Public Works
Sustainable Development
Transportation & Mobility
Debt Service
Other General Government
Total Operating Expenditures

$                              ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
               19,876,500
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                 19,876,500

                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
      13,923,024
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
      13,923,024

                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                  3,385,609
                              ‐
                             ‐
                              ‐
                  3,385,609

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
           10,045,754
                         ‐
                        ‐
                         ‐
           10,045,754

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
           2,695,077
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                      ‐
                       ‐
           2,695,077

                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                 674,056                  ‐
                         ‐
         899,584
                        ‐
                 ‐
                         ‐
                 ‐
                 674,056          899,584

             170,178         1,129,358
                      ‐
                    ‐
                      ‐
                    ‐
          1,300,000         1,390,555
          1,470,178         2,519,913

                     117,801
                             ‐
                             ‐
                 7,490,251
                 7,608,052

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
               424,100
               424,100

               14,588
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
               14,588

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

Other Resources Allocated:
Required Transfers Out
Discretionary Transfers Out
Capital Maintenance Transfers Out
Capital Transfers Out
Total Other Resources
Total Expenditures Allocated
Due To/From Health Benefits Fund

                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
          6,038,731
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
          6,038,731

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐

                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
        800,000
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
        800,000

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
            ‐
      75,000
      75,000

             3,427,604
                841,791
                897,147
             1,097,238
             4,623,459
             6,885,623
           63,777,748
           43,680,481
           13,923,024
           50,321,873
           97,484,850
         121,650,526
           32,450,691
           24,298,093
          67,749,675
           16,786,983
         549,896,806

                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐

            ‐
            ‐
            ‐
            ‐
            ‐

          34,911,437
            2,718,199
            2,095,875
          21,671,717
          61,397,228

 

                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐

 

               19,876,500           7,508,909

      16,442,937

               10,993,661

          10,469,854

          2,709,665

                674,056          899,584        800,000

    75,000

       611,294,034

                             ‐

                      ‐

                    ‐

                             ‐

                        ‐

                      ‐

                        ‐

                 ‐

                ‐

            ‐

            2,104,890

        10,444,379
                      ‐
                      ‐
             427,136
        10,871,515

            753,199
                    ‐
                    ‐
              54,588
            807,787

                 2,661,905
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                 2,661,905

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
               583,673
               583,673

               78,343
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
               78,343

                349,185
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                349,185

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐

                    8
                ‐
                ‐
                ‐
                    8

    70,662
            ‐
            ‐
            ‐
    70,662

          98,548,041
            4,457,240
            5,000,000
        110,873,417
        218,878,698

Projected Balances and Reserves:
Anticipated Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Other
Total Balances and Reserves

                         2,294
                             ‐
                             ‐
                             ‐
                           2,294

TOTAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED

$                19,878,794         18,380,424       17,250,724                 13,655,566            11,053,527            2,788,008              1,023,241          899,584         800,008     145,662          832,277,622

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 67

FY 2013 Adopted All Funds Budget

 

Debt
Service
Funds

General
Fund

Water &
Sewer/
Central
Regional
Wastewater

Vehicle
Rental

City
Insurance

Parking

       13,863,655

       11,887,357
                     ‐
     11,887,357

  10,616,486
                 ‐
10,616,486

SelfCemetery Insured
Perpetual Health
Sanitation
Care
Benefits

Projected Cash Balances Brought Forward:
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves
$      51,136,183
Reserves ‐ OPEB
       3,000,000
Total Balances Brought Forward
       54,136,183

     12,643,998        55,176,535
                   ‐
                     ‐
     12,643,998        55,176,535

Estimated Revenues:
Taxes:                                                 Millage
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Operating           4.1193
     93,930,068
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Debt Service      0.2149
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Sunrise Key        1.0000
                    ‐
Sales and Use Tax
       4,882,276
Franchise Fees
     16,400,000
Utility Service Taxes
     35,346,075
Licenses and Permits
       3,100,670
Intergovernmental 
     18,780,975
Charges for Services
     20,096,159
Fines and Forfeitures
       2,133,961
Other
     67,769,547
Total Revenues
 
     262,439,731

                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
       4,849,199                      ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
     112,973,591        18,200,000        12,604,351   10,671,427       19,105,722                  ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
     2,807,000                     ‐
                 ‐
                   ‐
         5,910,219              146,100              112,000         357,749               44,000      1,965,000
       4,849,199      118,883,810        18,346,100        12,716,351   13,836,176       19,149,722      1,965,000

Total Transfers and Other Sources

 

                     ‐

                     ‐

                 ‐

        3,441,497
                    ‐
      3,441,497

  19,552,625      2,979,515
                 ‐
                 ‐
  19,552,625      2,979,515

                    ‐

                 ‐

Building
Funds

  12,581,583      8,196,920
                 ‐
                 ‐
12,581,583    8,196,920

                 ‐

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
  17,200,000      3,104,336
                 ‐
                 ‐
          12,000      3,688,536
  17,212,000      6,792,872

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
  10,841,785
                 ‐
          55,500
                 ‐
          17,000
  10,914,285

                 ‐

                 ‐

     16,792,792    368,388,528

       31,114,097

   279,232,523    373,237,727

    149,997,907        18,346,100        12,716,351

  13,836,176       19,149,722      1,965,000

  17,212,000      6,792,872

  10,914,285

$    333,368,706    385,881,725

    205,174,442        32,209,755        24,603,708

  24,452,662       22,591,219

  21,517,625

  20,191,515

  19,111,205

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
       23,344,448
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
       83,518,005        18,178,462                      ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
       33,198,284                    ‐
                   ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
    116,716,289        18,178,462        23,344,448

                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
        8,438,618
                 ‐
                    ‐
                 ‐
      11,697,822
                 ‐
                    ‐
  14,050,869                     ‐
               ‐
                  ‐
                 ‐
                    ‐
  14,050,869       20,136,440

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
        889,492
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
        889,492

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
  19,104,500

Total Revenues and Other Sources
TOTAL RESOURCES AVAILABLE

     13,863,655

Airport

                 ‐

  19,374,455

 
Expenditures by Department:
City Attorney
City Auditor
City Clerk
City Commission
City Manager
Finance
Fire‐Rescue
Human Resources
Information Systems
Parks and Recreation
Police
Public Works
Sustainable Development
Transportation & Mobility
Debt Service
Other General Government
  Total Operating Expenditures
Other Resources Allocated:
Required Transfers Out1
Discretionary Transfers Out
Capital Transfers Out
Total Other Resources
Total Expenditures Allocated

$        3,371,963                    ‐
           825,823                    ‐
       1,139,563                    ‐
       1,065,220                    ‐
       4,284,720                    ‐
       6,693,541                    ‐
     65,488,672                    ‐
       2,133,163                    ‐
                    ‐
                   ‐
     38,126,460                    ‐
     88,918,541                    ‐
       5,626,843                    ‐
       6,362,018                    ‐
       1,282,572                    ‐
                    ‐
     47,393,158
     13,282,670                    ‐
     238,601,769      47,393,158

 

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
     6,352,543
                 ‐
     7,160,711                  ‐
                 ‐
               ‐
               ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
  19,104,500      7,160,711      6,352,543

     26,954,468    335,953,947          2,663,602
           455,656                    ‐
                    ‐
           884,000                    ‐
       12,294,506
     28,294,124    335,953,947        14,958,108

             35,237
                   ‐
                   ‐
             35,237

           100,792
                   ‐
                   ‐
          100,792

      404,904
               ‐
               ‐
      404,904

         467,896
                  ‐
                  ‐
         467,896

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐

                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐

      115,733
               ‐
   1,230,500
   1,346,233

   1,162,768
               ‐
               ‐
   1,162,768

   266,895,893    383,347,105

    131,674,397

     18,213,699

     23,445,240

14,455,773

    20,604,336

        889,492

  19,104,500

   8,506,944

   7,515,311

                   ‐
       35,409,492
                   ‐
                    ‐
                   ‐
                    ‐
       2,534,620        38,090,553
       2,534,620        73,500,045

       1,445,137
                   ‐
                   ‐
     12,550,919
     13,996,056

       1,158,468
                   ‐
                   ‐
                   ‐
       1,158,468

   6,803,672
               ‐
               ‐
   3,193,217
   9,996,889

                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐
      1,986,883
      1,986,883

                 ‐
     1,087,015
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
                 ‐
  20,628,133                  ‐
  20,628,133      1,087,015

10,867,511
               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
10,867,511

               ‐
               ‐
               ‐
11,595,894
11,595,894

Projected Balances and Reserves:
Anticipated Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves
  Total Balances and Reserves

     46,328,275
     16,144,538
       4,000,000
                    ‐
       66,472,813

TOTAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED

$    333,368,706    385,881,725     205,174,442        32,209,755        24,603,708   24,452,662       22,591,219   21,517,625   20,191,515   19,374,455   19,111,205

1

Includes a one‐time transfer from the Special Obligation Bond proceeds in the amount of $33.9MM in FY 2013

68 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

 

FY 2013 Adopted All Funds Budget

 

Stormwater

Central
Services

Community
Police
Housing &
Community Redevelopment Confiscation
Agency
Funds
Development

Arts &
Science
District
Garage

Projected Cash Balances Brought Forward:
 
Prior Year Operating Balance/Reserves
$          11,894,915          1,156,423
Reserves ‐ OPEB
                       ‐
                     ‐
Total Balances Brought Forward
           11,894,915         1,156,423

                            ‐
                            ‐
                           ‐

                                ‐
                                ‐
                              ‐

             2,713,933                     ‐
                         ‐
                    ‐
          2,713,933                   ‐

Estimated Revenues:
Taxes:                                                 Millage
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Operating           4.1193
                       ‐
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Debt Service      0.2149
                       ‐
Ad Valorem Taxes ‐ Sunrise Key        1.0000
                       ‐
Sales and Use Tax
                       ‐
Franchise Fees
                       ‐
Utility Service Taxes
                       ‐
Licenses and Permits
                       ‐
Intergovernmental 
                       ‐
Charges for Services
           5,781,000
Fines and Forfeitures
                       ‐
Other
               150,000
Total Revenues
 
             5,931,000

                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                    7,169,593
                                ‐
                                ‐
                         35,263
                    7,204,856

                         ‐

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
      15,351,063
                     ‐
            172,070
      15,523,133

                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
             11,732,668
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
             11,732,668

                       ‐

                     ‐

                            ‐

                    3,914,956

           5,931,000

      15,523,133

             11,732,668

                 11,119,812

                         ‐

TOTAL RESOURCES AVAILABLE

$          17,825,915

      16,679,556

             11,732,668

                 11,119,812

Expenditures by Department:
City Attorney
City Auditor
City Clerk
City Commission
City Manager
Finance
Fire‐Rescue
Human Resources
Information Systems
Parks and Recreation
Police
Public Works
Sustainable Development
Transportation & Mobility
Debt Service
Other General Government
  Total Operating Expenditures

$                        ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
           5,186,262
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
             5,186,262

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
      13,830,832
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
      13,830,832

                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
                            ‐
             11,632,668
                            ‐
                           ‐
                            ‐
             11,632,668

Other Resources Allocated:
Required Transfers Out
Discretionary Transfers Out
Capital Transfers Out
Total Other Resources

               189,994          1,395,675
                       ‐
                     ‐
           1,925,000                      ‐
             2,114,994         1,395,675

Total Transfers and Other Sources

 

Total Revenues and Other Sources

Total Expenditures Allocated

                     ‐

Beach
School
Business
Crossing Improvement
Guard
District

Total
Operating
Funds

                   71,403
                          ‐
                   71,403

              79,584       217,992,612
                     ‐
          3,000,000
            79,584    220,992,612

                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
        1,451,345               ‐
                    ‐
      800,000
                    ‐
              ‐
        1,451,345       800,000

                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                 634,723
                 634,723

                     ‐

                    ‐

                          ‐

                     ‐

      420,210,373

       1,451,345       800,000

                 634,723

              71,589

     950,664,933

            2,713,933

       1,451,345       800,000

                 706,126

            151,173

  1,171,657,545

                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                                ‐
                    3,273,952
                                ‐
                              ‐
                                ‐
                   3,273,952

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
             1,741,096
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                       ‐
                         ‐
            1,741,096

                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
      800,000
                    ‐
              ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
        1,451,345               ‐
                  ‐
             ‐
                    ‐
              ‐
       1,451,345       800,000

                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                 684,032
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                 684,032

                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
                   ‐
              79,500
              79,500

          3,371,963
             825,823
          1,139,563
          1,065,220
          4,284,720
          6,693,541
        65,488,672
        44,582,111
        13,830,832
        47,454,569
        91,459,638
      124,207,394
        28,305,213
        23,945,497
       80,591,442
        13,362,170
     550,608,368

                           ‐
                           ‐
                  100,000
                  100,000

                  2,624,656
                              ‐
                  5,221,204
                 7,845,860

                12,093
                       ‐
                       ‐
                12,093

                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐

                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐

                   ‐
                   ‐
                   ‐
                   ‐

    372,081,765
            455,656
       21,655,210
    394,192,630

                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐

              ‐
              ‐
             ‐

Sunrise
Key

              ‐

        93,930,068
          4,849,199
              71,289                 71,289
                     ‐
          4,882,276
                     ‐
        16,400,000
                     ‐
        35,346,075
                     ‐
        13,942,455
                     ‐
        37,683,236
                     ‐
      236,594,494
                     ‐
          5,740,961
                    300         81,014,507
              71,589       530,454,560

           7,301,255

      15,226,507

            11,732,668

               11,119,812

          1,753,190

     1,451,345

    800,000

                 684,032

            79,500

   944,800,998

         10,524,660
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
         10,524,660

         1,453,049
                     ‐
                     ‐
                     ‐
        1,453,049

                           ‐
                           ‐
                           ‐
                           ‐
                           ‐

                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐
                              ‐

              960,743
                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐
              960,743

                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐
                  ‐

             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐
             ‐

                   22,094
                          ‐
                          ‐
                          ‐
                   22,094

            71,673
                   ‐
                   ‐
                   ‐
            71,673

    116,131,790
       16,144,538
         4,000,000
       90,580,219
    226,856,546

Projected Balances and Reserves:
Anticipated Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves
  Total Balances and Reserves

 

TOTAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED

$          17,825,915       16,679,556              11,732,668                  11,119,812             2,713,933        1,451,345       800,000                  706,126             151,173   1,171,657,545

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 69

All Funds Revenue Summary
FY 2012
Actual

 
 
Taxes:
Property Taxes ‐ Operating
Property Taxes ‐ Sunrise Key
1987/92/98 Debt Taxes
1997/2002/11 Gen Oblig Debt Taxes
 2005 General Obligation Debt Taxes
 2010 General Obligation Debt Taxes
 Sales and Use Tax
Franchise Fees
Utility Taxes
     Total Taxes
Licenses and Permits
Local Business Taxes
Building Permits
     Total Licenses/Permits

$

FY 2013
Amended

92,412,845
93,930,068
70,125
71,289
1,731                             ‐
2,533,633
2,515,988
1,283,966
1,182,401
                  (1,786.00)
1,150,810
5,320,538
4,882,276
15,871,933
16,400,000
35,386,473
35,346,075
152,879,458
155,478,907

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar
Difference

97,569,296
3,639,228
74,177
2,888
                            ‐
0
2,519,710
3,722
1,183,678
1,277
1,148,519
(2,291)
4,882,276                              ‐
15,228,206
(1,171,794)
36,592,965
1,246,890
159,198,827
3,719,920

2,777,733
12,135,281
14,913,014

2,796,000
11,146,455
13,942,455

2,619,240
15,619,850
18,239,090

(176,760)
4,473,395
4,296,635

13,958,575
15,090,779
8,945,215
37,994,569

13,438,768
16,680,838
11,063,563
41,183,169

10,469,854
15,489,450
9,755,650
35,714,954

(2,968,914)
(1,191,388)
(1,307,913)
(5,468,215)

1,612,650
10,708,063
129,401,355
15,800,226
717,183
37,809
5,715,775
690,526
60,381,545
225,065,132

1,520,912
11,091,809
137,664,373
15,227,108
671,350
30,000
6,139,483
763,609
62,994,886
236,103,530

1,782,745
11,756,983
142,234,907
15,254,202
762,494
43,125
6,216,451
653,447
71,981,454
250,685,808

261,833
665,174
4,570,534
27,094
91,144
13,125
76,968
(110,162)
8,986,568
14,582,278

2,511,357
3,517,492
6,028,849

3,316,161
4,135,961
7,452,122

4,570,881
4,136,537
8,707,418

1,254,720
576
1,255,296

Miscellaneous:
Interest Earnings
Rents and Royalties
Special Assessments
Disposal of Fixed Assets
Contributions/Donations
Other Miscellaneous
     Total Miscellaneous

2,485,339
6,611,971
20,854,859
1,137,365
549,498
44,047,356
75,686,388

2,295,052
6,504,183
20,710,487
1,673,600
462,212
50,716,840
82,362,374

Other Sources:
Operating Transfers
     Total Other Sources

37,706,553
37,706,553

417,626,571
417,626,571

Intergovernmental:
Federal Grants
State‐Shared Revenues
Other Local Grants
   Total Intergovernmental
Charges for Services:
General Government
Public Safety
Physical Environment
Transportation
Parks and Recreation
Special Events
Special Facilities
Pools
Miscellaneous
     Total Charges for Services
Fines and Forfeits:
Judgments and Fines
Violations of Local Ordinances
     Total Fines and Forfeitures

Due To/From:
Health Benefits
     Total Due To/From
     Total Appropriated Fund Balance

                             ‐
                             ‐

Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other

Prior Year Operating Balance
     Total Balances and Reserves
     Total Resources

36,966,437
36,966,437

                2,104,890
2,104,890
                2,104,890                  2,104,890

65,839,598

18,998,222

                 2,000,000
               15,000,000
40,921,394
167,481,514
225,402,908

                            ‐
                3,000,000
              28,088,083
42,750,071
112,741,433
186,579,587

4,457,240
4,457,240
4,000,000                  1,000,000
13,274,563               (14,813,520)
110,354,361
67,604,290
78,769,855
(33,971,578)
210,856,019
24,276,432

$             807,874,810

        1,206,568,313

           832,277,622            (374,290,691)
 

 Note: Includes General, Special Revenue, Debt Service, Enterprise, Cemetery Perpetual Care, Internal Service Funds and the Arts & District Garage. 

70 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

(380,660,134)
(380,660,134)

32,197,939

Balances and Reserves:
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB

                            ‐
                            ‐

2,107,033
(188,019)
6,604,517
100,334
33,916,957
13,206,470
1,100,028               (573,572.00)
455,349
(6,863)
46,622,073
(4,094,767)
90,805,957
8,443,583

(46,841,376)

All Funds Expenditure Summary
FY 2012
Actual
 
Salaries and Wages:
Regular Salaries
Longevity
Other Wages
Employee Allowances
Overtime
Distributive Labor
Termination Pay
     Total Salaries and Wages

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar
Difference

$           145,285,370
              3,772,501
              6,110,640
              1,239,376
              8,570,555
                   (82,390)
              2,630,350
          167,526,402

151,924,968
3,069,241
6,394,553
1,253,991
6,868,074
16,000
918,800
170,445,627

155,589,310
3,113,692
6,436,925
1,374,657
6,936,382
16,000
912,903
174,379,869

3,664,342
44,451
42,372
120,666
68,308
0
(5,897)
3,934,242

Fringe Benefits:
Employee Benefits
Pension/Deferred Comp.
FICA Taxes
Insurance Premiums
     Total Fringe Benefits

                  379,616
            54,237,179
            12,178,234
            25,355,155
            92,150,184

467,162
30,268,533
12,443,646
20,743,279
63,922,620

468,256
31,988,560
12,881,129
23,378,293
68,716,238

Services/Materials:
Professional Services
Other Services
Leases and Rentals
Repair and Maintenance
Photo/Printing
Utilities, Communication
Chemicals
Fuel & Oil
Supplies
   Total Services/Materials

 
              4,621,597
10,316,955
12,117,061
1,800,106
            32,224,452
40,479,301
32,217,456
(8,261,845)
              8,941,174
2,141,179
2,031,528
(109,651)
              9,123,290
13,196,979
10,178,098
(3,018,881)
                  159,549
355,564
276,291
(79,273)
            15,678,553
17,527,341
17,336,159
(191,182)
              3,387,338
6,775,128
4,804,138
(1,970,990)
              9,534,602
11,195,791
9,726,354
(1,469,437)
              7,734,252
8,120,829
8,402,471
281,642
            91,404,807           110,109,067             97,089,556            (13,019,511)

Other Operating Expenditures:
Meetings/Schools
Contributions/Subsidies
Intragovernmental Charges
Insurance Premiums
     Total Other Expenditures

 
                  558,767
1,239,715
1,643,707
403,992
              8,669,661
10,459,299
9,881,751
(577,548)
            47,642,424
67,024,760
65,152,513
(1,872,247)
              6,781,008
3,785,089
7,338,168
3,553,079
            63,651,860             82,508,863             84,016,139               1,507,276

Nonoperating Expenditures:

            40,464,396             39,108,151             38,734,746                 (373,405)

Capital Outlay:
Equipment
     Total Capital Outlay

 
            11,359,293             26,729,387             10,338,169            (16,391,218)
            11,359,293             26,729,387             10,338,169            (16,391,218)

Debt Service

            48,091,295             80,942,608             67,749,675            (13,192,933)

 
1,094
1,720,027
437,483
2,635,014
4,793,618

Grant Service

              3,380,577             13,085,547               8,872,414              (4,213,133)

Due To/From:
Health Benefits
Special Assessments
     Total Due To/From

                           ‐
                           ‐
                           ‐

Other Uses:
Transfers
Year End Balance
Reserves ‐ Budget Stablization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
     Total Other Uses

 
            37,426,811
412,584,079
61,397,228
(351,186,851)
          108,698,456             57,509,237
98,548,041
41,038,804
                           ‐
16,144,538
4,457,240
(11,687,298)
              3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000               1,000,000
            28,088,083
13,274,563                            ‐
           (13,274,563)
          112,632,646
114,869,288
110,873,417              (3,995,871)
          289,845,996
618,381,705
280,275,926
(338,105,779)

Total Expenditures

$

807,874,810

                           ‐
2,104,890
1,334,738                            ‐
1,334,738
2,104,890

1,206,568,313

832,277,622

2,104,890
(1,334,738)
770,152

 

(374,290,691)

 Note: Includes General, Special Revenue, Debt Service, Enterprise, Cemetery Perpetual Care, Internal Service Funds and the Arts & District Garage. 

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 71

General Fund Revenue Summary
 FY 2012
Actual 

 FY 2013
Amended 

 FY 2014
Adopted 

 Dollar 
Difference 

$                92,412,844
                 5,320,538
               15,871,933
               35,386,473
            148,991,788

              93,930,068
                4,882,276
              16,400,000
              35,346,075
           150,558,419

              97,569,296
                4,882,276
              15,228,206
              36,592,965
           154,272,743

                 3,639,228
                             ‐
                (1,171,794)
                 1,246,890
                 3,714,324

Licenses and Permits
Local Business Taxes
Building Permits
     Total Licenses/Permits

                 2,777,733
                     251,788
                 3,029,521

                2,796,000
                    304,670
                3,100,670

                2,619,240
                    305,046
                2,924,286

                   (176,760)
                            376
                   (176,384)

Intergovernmental:
State‐Shared Revenues
Other Local Grants
   Total Intergovernmental

               15,090,778
                 1,942,601
               17,033,379

              16,680,838
                2,120,137
              18,800,975

              15,489,450
                2,260,241
              17,749,691

                (1,191,388)
                     140,104
                (1,051,284)

Charges for Services:
General Government
Public Safety
Physical Environment
Transportation
Parks and Recreation
Special Events
Special Facilities
Pools
Miscellaneous
     Total Charges for Services

                 1,402,586
               10,477,300
                     (46,126)
                     975,347
                     717,184
                       37,809
                 5,715,781
                     690,526
                     125,701
               20,096,108

                1,318,312
              11,091,809
                    (49,340)
                            ‐
                    671,350
                      30,000
                6,139,483
                    763,609
                    130,936
              20,096,159

                1,574,690
              11,756,983
                3,606,658
                             ‐
                    762,494
                      43,125
                6,216,451
                    653,447
                1,422,822
              26,036,670

                     256,378
                     665,174
                 3,655,998
                             ‐
                       91,144
                       13,125
                       76,968
                   (110,162)
                 1,291,886
                 5,940,511

Fines and Forfeits:
Total Nonoperating Expenditures
Violations of Local Ordinances
     Total Fines and Forfeitures

                 1,760,169
                 1,025,382
                 2,785,551

                3,316,161
                    528,961
                3,845,122

                4,270,381
                    529,537
                4,799,918

                     954,220
                            576
                    954,796

Miscellaneous:
Interest Earnings
Rents and Royalties
Special Assessments
Disposal of Fixed Assets
Contributions/Donations
Other Miscellaneous
     Total Miscellaneous

                     425,196
                 2,964,211
               20,307,764
                     379,303
                     549,498
               35,186,965
               59,812,937

                    567,000
                2,858,763
              20,076,500
                1,013,600
                    462,212
              42,803,072
              67,781,147

                    418,444
                2,977,358
              33,275,963
                    440,028
                    455,349
              40,817,271
              78,384,413

                   (148,556)
                     118,595
               13,199,463
                   (573,572)
                        (6,863)
                (1,985,801)
               10,603,266

Other Sources:
Operating Transfers
     Total Other Sources

               13,027,340
               13,027,340

              18,463,241
              18,463,241

                    982,884
                   982,884

              (17,480,357)
              (17,480,357)

     Total Appropriated Fund Balance

                 2,858,683

                1,908,812

                             ‐

                (1,908,812)

Balances and Reserves:
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Prior Year Operating Balances
     Total Balances and Reserves

                             ‐
                 2,000,000
               15,000,000
                     648,822
               42,565,667
               60,214,489

                            ‐
                3,000,000
              28,088,083
                    635,183
              26,582,415
              58,305,681

                4,457,240
                4,000,000
              13,274,563
                    635,183
              37,760,180
              60,127,166

                 4,457,240
                 1,000,000
              (14,813,520)
                             ‐
               11,177,765
                 1,821,485

$             327,849,796

           342,860,226

           345,277,771

                 2,417,545

Taxes:
Property Taxes ‐ Operating
 Sales and Use Tax
Franchise Fees
Utility Taxes
     Total Taxes

     Total Resources

72 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

General Fund Expenditure Summary
 FY 2012
Actual 
Salaries and Wages:
Regular Salaries
Longevity
Other Wages
Employee Allowances
Overtime
Distributive Labor
Termination Pay
     Total Salaries and Wages

FY 2014
Adopted

 Dollar 
Difference 

                  3,017,221
                  5,927,462
                     975,936
                  6,674,012
                              ‐
                  1,845,318
             133,311,311

            114,735,652
                 2,358,718
                 6,221,875
                    930,511
                 5,207,228
                        1,000
                    801,550
            130,256,534

Fringe Benefits:
Employee Benefits
Pension/Deferred Comp.
FICA Taxes
Insurance Premiums
     Total Fringe Benefits

                     300,939
                44,465,045
                  9,667,378
                18,604,050
               73,037,412

                    373,400
               23,085,735
                 9,349,529
               14,997,748
              47,806,412

Services/Materials:
Professional Services
Other Services
Leases and Rentals
Repair and Maintenance
Photo/Printing
Utilities, Communication
Chemicals
Fuel & Oil
Supplies
   Total Services/Materials

                  2,314,308
                  6,775,963
                     888,306
                  2,840,869
                       30,652
                  7,861,430
                       81,097
                  3,484,361
                  4,787,435
               29,064,421

                 5,329,442
               10,614,405
                 1,085,788
                 2,063,227
                    105,554
                 8,563,196
                    189,380
                 3,632,667
                 4,702,273
              36,285,932

Other Operating Expenditures:
Meetings/Schools
Contributions/Subsidies
Intragovernmental Charges
Insurance Premiums
     Total Other Expenditures

                     343,304
                  7,918,866
                12,853,447
                  3,440,450
               24,556,067

                    716,775
                 9,334,700
               16,740,931
                 1,203,351
              27,995,757

     Total Nonoperating Expenditures

                     109,808

                      61,980

Capital Outlay:
Equipment
     Total Capital Outlay

                     275,599
                     275,599

                 1,092,936
                1,092,936

     Total Debt Service

                             ‐

                    351,166

Other Uses:
Required Transfers Out
Discretionary Tranfers Out
Capital Transfers Out
     Total Other Uses

                  6,830,519
                     224,054
                     226,112
                 7,280,685

               38,641,386
                    549,706
                 1,512,736
              40,703,828

            114,739,992
4,340
                 2,322,105
(36,613)
                 6,258,084
36,209
                 1,018,767
88,256
                 5,183,915
(23,313)
                        1,000                               ‐
                    883,646
82,096
            130,407,509
150,975
 
 
                    366,169                    (7,231.00)
               23,736,739
651,004
                 9,580,858
231,329
               16,731,214
1,733,466
              50,414,980
2,608,568
 
 
                 6,024,312
694,870
                 6,592,255
(4,022,150)
                    965,562
(120,226)
                 2,235,961
172,734
                      94,341
(11,213)
                 8,499,462
(63,734)
                    138,284
(51,096)
                 3,407,663
(225,004)
                 5,039,859
337,586
              32,997,699
(3,288,233)
 
 
                    790,132
73,357
                 8,296,252
(1,038,448)
               20,819,330
4,078,399
                 3,187,493
1,984,142
              33,093,207
5,097,450
 
                      61,934
(46)
 
 
                 1,000,000
(92,936)
                1,000,000
(92,936)
 
                            ‐
(351,166)
 
 
               28,642,712
(9,998,674)
                 2,718,199
2,168,493
                 4,809,475
3,296,739
              36,170,386
(4,533,442)

Due To/From
Due To/From Health Benefits Fund
Due To/From Special Assessments Fund
     Total Other Uses

                              ‐
                              ‐
                             ‐

                             ‐
                 1,334,738
                1,334,738

                 2,104,890                   2,104,890
                             ‐
                (1,334,738)
                2,104,890                      770,152

Projected Balances and Reserves
Reserves ‐ Budget Stabilization
Reserves ‐ OPEB
Reserves ‐ Prepaid Pension
Reserves ‐ Other
Year End Balance
  Total Balances & Reserves

                              ‐
                  3,000,000
                28,088,083
                     635,183
                28,491,227
               60,214,493

               16,144,538
                 4,000,000
               13,274,563
                    635,183
               22,916,659
              56,970,943

                 4,457,240
(11,687,298)
                 5,000,000
1,000,000
                             ‐
              (13,274,563)
                    635,183                               ‐
               48,934,743
26,018,084
              59,027,166
2,056,223

$              327,849,796

            342,860,226

            345,277,771

     Total Expenditures

$              114,871,362

FY 2013
Amended

2,417,545

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 73

General Fund Transfers
TRANSFERS IN

   

FY 2012 
Actual

FY 2013 
Amended 
Budget

FY 2014 
Adopted 
Budget

                     ‐
            648,254
     16,144,538
           685,133
            343,537
           226,912
            414,867
                     ‐
      18,463,241

                      ‐
              982,884
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
                      ‐
             982,884

FY 2013 
Amended 
Budget

FY 2014 
Adopted 
Budget

        3,914,956
              77,513
        1,512,736
           427,193
              45,000
                     ‐
                     ‐
     31,181,159
        3,545,270
      40,703,827

          4,058,400
                      ‐
          4,809,475
             663,199
                      ‐
                      ‐
          2,055,000
       21,564,863
          3,019,449
        36,170,386

 

Beach Improvement District Fund
Building Permits Fund
Debt Special Obligation Bonds
Gas Tax Fund
General Capital Projects
Miscellaneous Federal/State/County Grants
Parking Fund
Vehicle Rental Fund
Total Transfer In

$

                   31,250
                         ‐
                         ‐
                         ‐
             8,996,090
                         ‐
                         ‐
             4,000,000
$            13,027,340

 

TRANSFERS OUT

   

FY 2012 
Actual

 

Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) Fund
Central Services Fund
General Capital Projects
Miscellaneous Grants
Parking Fund
Parks Impact Fee Projects
Sanitation Fund
Special Obligation Bonds
Special Obligation Loans
Total Transfer Out

74 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

$

            3,823,465
                         ‐
                226,112
                156,625
                         ‐
                  67,429
                         ‐
                         ‐
            3,007,054
$              7,280,685

Fund Balance Projections
Ending fund balances are shown for the General Fund and all other funds. The Enterprise Fund
balances are a calculated amount since the accounting is different for proprietary funds versus
governmental funds. The FY 2013 General Fund estimated fund balance is $42.9 million; which
represents 15.2% of the General Fund budgeted expenditures. The FY 2014 Adopted Budget
does not use fund balance and is a structurally balanced budget. It is anticipated that by the
end of FY 2014, the City will have an available fund balance of $54.0 million. This represents
19.0% of the General Fund budgeted expenditures plus required transfers.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 75

Long‐Term Debt Obligations
FOR THE 12 MONTH PERIOD ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 2014
Beginning
09/30/2012

DETAIL

Additions

FY 2013
Principal

Ending
09/30/2013

FY 2014
Principal

FY 2014
Interest

FY 2014
Requirement

               490,000
               430,000
           2,280,000
           3,200,000

               692,011
               716,600
               238,650
            1,647,261

           1,182,011
           1,146,600
           2,518,650
           4,847,261

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

                       ‐
                       ‐
                       ‐

Governmental Activities
   General Obligation Bonds
Fund 236
Fund 236
Fund 236

2005
2011A
2011B

          17,115,000
          19,410,000
          11,730,000
$           48,255,000

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

             (475,000)
             (425,000)
         (2,225,000)
         (3,125,000)

         16,640,000
         18,985,000
           9,505,000
         45,130,000

   Tax Increment Bonds
Fund 288
Fund 288

2004A
2004B

            8,744,000                         ‐
            3,717,000                         ‐
$           12,461,000                         ‐

         (8,744,000)                        ‐
         (3,717,000)                        ‐
       (12,461,000)                        ‐

                       ‐ 
                       ‐ 
                       ‐ 

                             ‐         337,755,000
$                              ‐         337,755,000

       (16,480,000)       321,275,000
       (16,480,000)       321,275,000

         15,070,000           11,290,973
         15,070,000           11,290,973

         26,360,973
         26,360,973

2010A
2010B
2011A
2011B

$           10,625,900
            8,589,300
            7,218,000
            2,546,000
$           28,979,200

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

         (1,728,800)
             (761,100)
             (387,000)
             (338,000)
         (3,214,900)

           8,897,100
           7,828,200
           6,831,000
           2,208,000
         25,764,300

           1,214,100
               781,300
               399,000
               346,000
           2,740,400

               216,200
               208,230
               197,619
                 49,858
               671,907

           1,430,300
              989,530
              596,619
              395,858
           3,412,307

  Total Governmental

$        89,695,200

    337,755,000

     (35,280,900)     392,169,300

       21,010,400

       13,610,141

       34,620,541

  Special Obligation Bonds
Fund 237

2012

  Special Obligation Loans
Fund 243
Fund 243
Fund 243
Fund 243

Business‐Type Activities
   Water & Sewer Revenue Bonds
Fund 450
Fund 451
Fund 450
Fund 450
Fund 450
Fund 450
Fund 451

2003
2003
2006
2008
2010
2012
2012

$             1,150,339
                  54,661
          91,425,000
        142,260,000
          78,880,000
          61,655,299
            2,929,701
$         378,355,000

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

         (1,150,339)
               (54,661)
         (1,755,000)
         (3,440,000)
         (1,790,000)
         (1,102,607)
               (52,393)
         (9,345,000)

                       ‐
                       ‐
         89,670,000
      138,820,000
         77,090,000
         60,552,692
           2,877,308
      369,010,000

                       ‐ 
                       ‐ 
           1,835,000
           3,560,000
           1,845,000
           2,243,399
               106,601
           9,590,000

                        ‐
                        ‐
            4,044,396
            6,530,285
            3,345,700
            2,522,356
               119,856
          16,562,593

                       ‐
                       ‐
           5,879,396
         10,090,285
           5,190,700
           4,765,756
              226,456
         26,152,593

WWG12047439P  $             5,559,674
WWG12047439P 
            1,389,918
WW47439L
          12,223,145
WW47439L
            4,074,382
WW47440S
          12,557,352
WW474410
          29,671,217
WW474410
            7,417,804
WW474420
            8,354,265
$           81,247,757

                        ‐

                        ‐
                        ‐

             (313,433)
               (78,358)
             (759,633)
             (253,211)
             (775,877)
         (1,616,794)
             (404,199)
             (439,486)
         (4,640,990)

           5,246,241
           1,311,560
         11,463,512
           3,821,171
         11,781,475
         28,054,423
           7,013,606
           7,914,779
         76,606,767

               322,588
                 80,647
               780,574
               260,191
               792,914
           1,653,705
               413,426
               449,386
           4,753,431

               146,311
                 36,578
               300,607
               100,202
               246,489
               614,472
               153,618
               171,014
            1,769,291

              468,899
              117,225
           1,081,181
              360,394
           1,039,403
           2,268,177
              567,044
              620,400
           6,522,722

  Total Business‐Type Activities $     459,602,757

                     ‐

     (13,985,990)     445,616,767

       14,343,431

       18,331,884

       32,675,315

  Total All Activities

    337,755,000

     (49,266,890)     837,786,067

       35,353,831

       31,942,025

       67,295,856

                        ‐
                        ‐

   State Revolving Fund Loans
Fund 450
Fund 451
Fund 450
Fund 451
Fund 450
Fund 450
Fund 451
Fund 451

$     549,297,957

76 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

                        ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

Departmental Budgets
This section details each of the departments that make up the City of Fort Lauderdale
governmental structure. The City government is organized into five (5) charter offices and
nine (9) operating departments along functional lines. This section provides an overview of
each of the departments including the departmental organizational chart, division
descriptions, FY 2013 major accomplishments and FY 2014 initiatives, select performance
measures, and a departmental budget summary by fund. Below is a brief description of
the City Manager’s Office and each department that will be highlighted in this section.

Charter Offices
The Charter Offices are comprised of the City Commission, City Attorney, City Auditor, City
Clerk, and City Manager. The City Commission operates under the Commission-Manager
form of government. The Commission set the policies for the effective operation of the
city. The City Attorney’s Office provides high quality, professional, timely, and costeffective legal and risk management services. The main focuses of the office are to
protect the interests of the city, minimize future legal problems, and ensure compliance
with city, State, and Federal laws. The City Auditor provides an independent, objective,
and comprehensive auditing program of city operations. The City Clerk’s Office serves as
custodian of all records of an official character pertaining to the affairs of the city including
documentation filed for compliance with state and county ethics laws and ensures public
accessibility; supports the City Commission in administrative matters; supervises municipal
elections; and directs the City’s records management program.
The City Manager’s Office is a team of professional and diverse public administrators. The
City of Fort Lauderdale’s mission is concise: We Build Community. To accomplish this, the
organization was streamlined to nine departments that are part of five interdisciplinary
Cylinders of Excellence: Infrastructure, Public Places, Neighborhood Enhancement,
Business Development, Public Safety and the Internal Services platform. Each area has an
active strategic plan that reflects Commission priorities and the developing community
vision. As the first municipality represented on the steering committee for the Southeast
Regional Climate Change Compact, leadership is proactive in local, regional, and national
sustainability and climate resiliency efforts. Operating under the traditional CommissionManager form of government, the City Manager is appointed by the five-member City
Commission. The office is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the City with a total
annual budget of more than $832.2 million and 2,275 full-time employees. The City
Manager’s team includes Budget/CIP and Grants, Neighborhood Support, Public Affairs,
and Structural Innovation.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 77

Human Resources Department
The Human Resources Department partners with departments to hire and retain a
qualified and diverse professional workforce for the delivery of excellent services to the
community. It maintains all personnel policies, rules, and regulations, workplace safety
standards and administers employment benefits to all City staff. The department
represents the City during collective bargaining discussions and union grievance hearings.
The department also protects the City’s physical and financial assets against loss by
maintaining effective insurance programs and minimizing the City’s exposure to risk.

Finance Department
The Finance Department provides fiscal, accounting, and procurement controls and
services for the City. The department ensures the timely and accurate recording of
transactions, such as payroll and vendor payments, in accordance with accounting
standards for state and local governments. It manages the City’s investment and debt
portfolios to maximize investment return, and to reduce the cost of the City’s debt. The
department is an internal resource to all City departments and strives to provide excellent
service to entities conducting financial and purchasing transactions with the City.

Fire-Rescue Department
The Fort Lauderdale Fire Rescue Department, established in 1912, provides fire rescue and
emergency management services to the citizens and visitors to the City of Fort Lauderdale,
the City of Wilton Manors, and the Town of Lazy Lake. The department operates eleven
fire stations, and is one of the busiest amongst cities in the tri-county area, responding to
over 40,000 calls for service annually. The department utilizes many highly trained special
operations teams, including Hazardous Materials, Technical Response, Dive Rescue,
Marine Rescue, Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) Medical, and Aircraft Rescue
Firefighting (ARFF). The department utilizes advanced medical protocols, such as induced
hypothermia (ICE alert), which results in survival rates that greatly exceed the national
average. The department also conducts fire prevention inspections on commercial
properties, reviews commercial building plans for fire code compliance, and investigates
fire origin and cause. The department leads emergency management planning, the
Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and the Community Emergency Response Teams.

78 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
The Information Technology Services Department (ITS) is a centralized service department
that provides technical resources (support, software, hardware, services, direction, and
leadership) to the various departments for the City of Fort Lauderdale. The ITS department
delivers customer care, provides computers, telephones, radios, Intranet, Internet,
electronic mail, telephones, radios, wireless communications, Web site, business software
applications, desktop software applications, and training. The ITS Team is responsible for
all system implementations, security, and the tactical and strategic planning for
technology solutions and services to support City functions and service delivery to the
citizens.

Parks and Recreation Department
The Parks and Recreation Department provides safe parks and recreation facilities along
with quality programming to meet the needs of the entire community and enhance the
quality of life in the City of Fort Lauderdale. The department has opened new parks and
expanded green space contributing to the aesthetic enhancement and livability of the City.
The department earned national accreditation from the Commission for Accreditation of
Park and Recreation Agencies (CAPRA) in 2011 and earned national recognition as a Playful
City USA community in 2012 as a result of its efforts to increase play opportunities for
children. The department also produces award-winning special events that build
community, enrich lives, and showcase the City’s best attributes. Sponsorship and
promotion of new, high visibility events have been pivotal in attracting tourists, residents
of surrounding cities, and locals to downtown Fort Lauderdale and the beach. In 2012, to
maximize efficiency of operations, the department expanded and now includes Marine
Services, Sanitation, Real Estate, Cemeteries, and Facilities Maintenance divisions.

Police Department
The City of Fort Lauderdale Police Department invokes a strong partnership with the
community to reduce crime and improve the quality of life in our community. The Office
of the Chief is responsible for the overall management of the Police Department, which is
divided into three main bureaus. The Operations Bureau is responsible for the physical 24hour delivery of police services throughout the City. The Investigative Bureau is comprised
of the Criminal Investigations Division, responsible for the investigations of the persons’
and property crimes, and the Special Investigations Division, which primarily conducts
proactive investigations into ongoing criminal activity. The Support Services Bureau is
responsible for addressing the administrative, financial and equipment needs of the
Department. The department employs the CompStat philosophy, along with the
application of the Intelligence Led Policing model, and works with neighboring law
enforcement agencies to identify criminal trends and solve crime. The department
listens to community concerns and shares pertinent information through regular
attendance at neighborhood association meetings and makes timely crime data available
through Raidsonline.com. The department is fully accredited by the Commission for
Florida Law Enforcement Accreditation.
FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 79

Public Works Department
The Public Works Department is the largest provider of infrastructure services in Broward
County. The department delivers many of the critical services and programs that affect
the daily lives of neighbors. It produces high quality drinking water, collects and treats
wastewater; manages solid waste through recycling, garbage, and yard waste. The
department also handles construction projects that provide direct neighborhood benefits,
including streets, drainage, sewers, parks, buildings, parking facilities, fire stations,
streetscapes, neighborhood improvements, and more. The department is committed to
operating in a sustainable manner that includes Leadership in Energy & Environmental
Design (LEED) construction, increased recycling, improved stormwater management,
environmental enhancement, and effective fleet maintenance.

Sustainable Development Department
The Sustainable Development Department provides programs and administers plans and
policies to enhance the quality of life for our neighbors and visitors by guiding quality
development, promoting economic prosperity, environmental and social equity, health,
safety and welfare of the community. The department encourages and directs orderly
growth, and promotes well-designed development through sound planning principles that
focus on community development, urban revitalization, long-range planning, and historic
preservation. It provides business liaison functions to the community by focusing on
business attraction, retention and expansion activities, and implements Community
Redevelopment Agency (CRA) plans and initiatives. To improve overall welfare and
community appearance, it conducts code compliance, which includes voluntary
compliance and prompt corrections. Development permit issuance, inspections and
records requests and are strategically managed to ensure a safe construction through the
Florida Building Code. The department also improves houses, public facilities through the
effective administration of Federal and State grant programs.

Transportation and Mobility Department
The City of Fort Lauderdale Transportation and Mobility Department plans and
builds pedestrian, bike, and vehicular paths and complete streets to promote and enhance
regional multi-modal transit options, reduce traffic congestion, and create sustainable and
walkable communities. The Transportation, Aviation and Parking divisions work together
to enhance the area’s transit network by creating pedestrian paths and greenways along
significant corridors.
This is accomplished in partnership with regional
transportation systems to implement long-range master plans for “complete
streets”, transportation hubs, and transit-oriented development. Transportation and
Mobility operates the successful Executive Airport, the Downtown Helistop, Industrial
Airpark, and the Foreign-Trade Zone. The department also administers public parking to
support residents, tourists, and businesses.

80 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Attorney's Office
Organizational Chart
TOTAL FTE's ‐ 25

POLICE LEGAL SERVICES

CITY ATTORNEY
City Attorney
Senior Assistant City Attorney
Assistant City Attorney III
Assistant City Attorney II
Assistant City Attorney I
Paralegal Assistant
Legal Admin Assistant
Legal Secretary
Secretary I

1
1
5
1
1
1
1
6
1

Assistant City Attorney III
Legal Secretary

CITY PROSECUTORS
1
1

Assistant City Attorney III
Assistant City Attorney I
Legal Secretary
Legal Clerk
Clerk II

1
1
1
1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 81

City Attorney’s Office
Division Description
The City Attorney’s Office responds to the City Commission, all city departments, municipal officials, and city
advisory boards on legal questions, issues, and requests for information that arise during the course of each
business day. In doing so, the City Attorney’s Office provides high quality, professional, timely, and cost-effective
legal and risk management services. The main focuses of the office are to protect the interests of the city,
minimize future legal problems, and ensure compliance with city, State, and Federal laws.

Core Services








Advises and assists city staff and the City Commission on various legal issues.
Prosecutes violations of city ordinances.
Prosecute forfeiture actions and generate revenues for the Forfeiture Confiscation Trust Fund.
Represents the city as trial and appellate counsel in litigation matters.
Advises and responds to questions and issues pertaining to the standards of conduct for public officers
and employees.
Reviews and responds to requests and questions relating to Florida’s Sunshine Law and Public Records
Law.
Advise the police department on legal matters relating to enforcement of City, State, and Federal laws.

82 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Attorney's Office
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         3,980,171 $         3,419,844 $         3,427,604 $                 7,760

Percent
Difference
0.2%

Total Funding

$         3,980,171 $         3,419,844 $         3,427,604 $                 7,760

0.2%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

City Attorney

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         3,980,171 $         3,419,844 $         3,427,604 $                 7,760

Percent
Difference
0.2%

Total Expenditures

$         3,980,171 $         3,419,844 $         3,427,604 $                 7,760

0.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         3,745,810 $         3,101,394 $         3,148,438 $               47,044

Operating Expenses

               234,361                318,450                279,166 $             (39,284)

Total Expenditures
$         3,980,171 $         3,419,844 $         3,427,604 $                 7,760
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

Percent
Difference
1.5%

‐12.3%
0.2%

Personal Services:
  Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

$               48,338

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in legal services
   Increase in costs/fees/permits

               (50,740)
                 10,000

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 83

84 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Auditor's Office
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's ‐ 5

ADMINISTRATION
City Auditor
Assistant City Auditor III
Assistant City Auditor II
Assistant City Auditor I
Administrative Assistant II

1
1
1
1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 85

City Auditor’s Office
Division Description
The City Auditor provides an independent, objective, and comprehensive auditing program of city operations.
As an appointed office, it is charged with supporting the city commission by providing an independent review
of business practices, procedures, internal controls, and procurement practices that are used, employed, and
communicated by city government. This is accomplished through comprehensive, professional audits,
reviews, and in-depth evaluations performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards.

Core Services






Conducts financial, compliance, economic, efficiency, and performance audits of the city government
and city officials.
Performs Legislative Review to provide assurance to the city commission and assist in the decision
making process.
Advises the city commission on a variety of financial issues.
Serves as an additional technical resource to city staff and committees for guidance related to
accounting, financial reporting, budgeting, and other fiscal activities.
Provides written audit reports to both the city commission and city manager.

86 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Auditor's Office
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            741,148 $            827,323 $            841,791 $               14,468

Percent
Difference
1.7%

Total Funding

$            741,148 $            827,323 $            841,791 $              14,468

1.7%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

City Auditor

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            741,148 $            827,323 $            841,791 $               14,468

Percent
Difference
1.7%

Total Expenditures

$            741,148 $            827,323 $            841,791 $              14,468

1.7%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            683,617 $            747,963 $            762,386 $               14,423

Percent
Difference
1.9%

Operating Expenses

                 52,531                  77,860                  79,405                    1,545

2.0%

Capital Outlay

                   5,000                    1,500                        ‐

                  (1,500)

Total Expenditures
$            741,148 $            827,323 $            841,791 $              14,468
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Personal Services:
  Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

‐100.0%
1.7%

$               13,581

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in office equipment rental
   Increase in General Liability Insurance due to a one time reduction in FY 2013

$
                  (2,100)
                   2,959

Capital Outlay:
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget included one time purchases

                  (1,500)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 87

88 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Clerk's Office
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's ‐ 7.4

ADMINISTRATION
City Clerk
Senior Assistant City Clerk
Assistant City Clerk IV
Assistant City Clerk II
Assistant City Clerk III
Assistant City Clerk I

1
1
1
2.6
0.8
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 89

City Clerk’s Office
Division Description
The City Clerk’s Office serves as custodian of all records of an official character pertaining to the affairs of the
city including documentation filed for compliance with state and county ethics laws and ensures public
accessibility; supports the City Commission in administrative matters; supervises municipal elections; and
directs the City’s records management program. Additionally, the City Clerk’s Office assists departments and
appointed boards with respect to the proper conduct of public meetings.

Core Services










Manages the compilation and distribution of the city commission’s agendas.
Assists departments and appointed boards with proper conduct of public meetings.
Administers records management program.
Publishes and posts public notices.
Facilitates City Commission’s appointments to boards and committees.
Oversees registration of lobbyist and public accessibility to required filing of ethics documentation.
Supports the City Commission in conducting public hearings.
Oversees municipal elections.
Maintains official records.

90 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Clerk's Office
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            954,884 $         1,197,390 $            897,147 $           (300,242)

Percent 
Difference
‐25.1%

Total Funding

$            954,884 $         1,197,390 $            897,147 $           (300,242)

‐25.1%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

City Clerk

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            954,884 $         1,197,390 $            897,147 $           (300,242)

Percent 
Difference
‐25.1%

Total Expenditures

$            954,884 $         1,197,390 $            897,147 $           (300,242)

‐25.1%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            686,876 $            630,256 $            693,263 $               63,007

Operating Expenses

               268,007                511,829                203,884              (307,945)

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

                 55,305                        ‐

Percent 
Difference
10.0%

‐60.2%

               (55,305)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures
$            954,884 $         1,197,390 $            897,147 $           (300,242)
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

‐25.1%

Personal Services:
   Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

$               59,647

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in professional services (general and special election costs)
   Decrease in other services
   Increase in computer maintenance
   Increase in General Liability Insurance due to a one time reduction in FY 2013

             (261,563)
               (50,000)
                   3,593
                   2,959

Capital Outlay:
   Decrease due to one‐time start‐up costs for agenda management system

               (55,305)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 91

92 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Commission's Office
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's ‐ 12

ADMINISTRATION
Mayor‐Commissioner
City Commissioner
Mayor's Asst (Comm Asst IV)
Commission Assistant Coord
Commission Assistant IV
Commission Assistant II

1
4
1
1
4
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 93

City Commission’s Office
Division Description
The City Commission operates under the Commission-Manager form of government. The Mayor is elected at-large, and
the four commissioners are elected by districts. Together, the Mayor and Commissioners set the policies for the
effective operation of the city. The administrative responsibility of the City rests with the City Manager, who is
appointed by the City Commission.

Core Services







Establishes city policies and enacts ordinances, rules and regulations.
Appoints the City Manager, City Attorney, City Auditor, City Clerk, Advisory Board Members, and commission
staff.
Provides leadership and direction for the city’s future.
Assures the present and future fiscal integrity of the city.
Provides quick and courteous response to neighbor concerns.
Adopts the Annual Budget.

94 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Commission's Office
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,035,731 $         1,066,828 $         1,097,238 $               30,410

Percent 
Difference
2.8%

Total Funding

$         1,035,731 $         1,066,828 $         1,097,238 $              30,410

2.8%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

City Commission

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,035,731 $         1,066,828 $         1,097,238 $               30,410

Percent 
Difference
2.8%

Total Expenditures

$         1,035,731 $         1,066,828 $         1,097,238 $              30,410

2.8%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            961,580 $            965,474 $            993,308 $               27,834

Percent 
Difference
2.8%

Operating Expenses

                 74,151                101,353                103,930                    2,577

2.5%

Total Expenditures
$         1,035,731 $         1,066,828 $         1,097,238 $              30,410
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

2.8%

Personal Services:
    Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments
    Increase in Health Insurance due to new employee plan selection

$               13,518
                 13,565

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in annual cost  of Toshiba copier
   Increase in General Liability Insurance due to a one time reduction in FY 2013

                  (1,607)
                   4,142

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 95

96 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Manager's Office
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 34

ADMINISTRATION
City Manager
Assistant City Manager
Administrative Assistant
Service Clerk

NEIGHBOR SUPPORT

BUDGET/CIP & GRANTS
Budget Manager
Assistant Budget Manager
Asst. Manager of CIP/Grants
Sr. Financial Mgmt Analyst
Grants Admin. & Compliance Off.
Administrative Assistant I
Senior Management Fellow

1
2
3
1

1
1
1
2
1
2
1

Neighbor Services Manager
Chief Services Officer
Administrative Assistant II
Administrative Assistant I
Senior Management Fellow

STRUCTURAL INNOVATION
1
1
1
2
1

Structural Innovation Manager
Senior Performance Analyst
Performance Analyst
Administrative Assistant
Senior Management Fellow

1
1
1
1
1

PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Public Affairs Manager
Public Information Specialist
Webmaster
Graphic Designer
Administrative Assistant I

1
3
1
1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 97

City Manager’s Office
Structural Innovation
Division Description
Structural Innovation directs FL²STAT, a community-focused approach to strategic planning, performance
management and process improvement for all City departments. The division works to build a
foundation of innovation, through inclusive leadership, creativity, internal collaboration, external
partnerships, and community connections. Structural Innovation is a dedicated resource to
departments to achieve this through training and support.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments













Provided integral support as part of the Core Staff Team for the City’s long-range Visioning
initiative through developing and utilizing a number of new community outreach efforts, and
conducting the Vision Plan writing. Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale, the 2035 Vision Plan, was
unanimously approved by City Commission.
Worked with all departments to complete and align Press Play Fort Lauderdale, the City’s 2018
Strategic Plan, with the vision plan. The strategic plan was unanimously approved by City
Commission.
Led the progress and framework for the reporting of the FY 2014 Commission Annual Action
Plan.
Managed the completion of the 2012 Neighbor Survey, providing statistically valid neighbor
opinions of the City and various services for departments to focus on when prioritizing services.
Implemented FL2STAT meetings to monitor, analyze, and improve citywide performance and
progress with strategic initiatives from a cross-departmental, collaborative perspective.
Provided management and training of citywide performance management software for
strategic and department scorecards and progress reporting.
Facilitated Process Improvement events and projects, including the IBM ‘First of a Kind’ project
for predictive policing, Neighbor Requests, Special Events, Payroll, Business Tax Receipts, and
Code Enforcement.
Initiated a Six Sigma training program to build internal analytical capacities.
Provide project management and collaborative support for the IBM First of a Kind (FOAK) City
Resource Optimization Solution pilot for predictive policing
Led the City’s efforts in the International City/County Management Association (ICMA) and the
Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC) benchmarking for comparable performance data and
best practice research.
Completed the Alliance for Innovation’s Innovation Academy with a cross-departmental team,
producing an internal “We Build Community” employee recognition tool-box for supervisory
staff.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives






Implement the community vision through community partnerships, the Strategic Plan and
Commission Annual Action Plan, and develop the Vision Scorecard. Actively track and monitor
these citywide initiatives through the performance software and on the City’s external website.
Implement a citywide Process Improvement Plan (PIP), that prioritizes process improvements
based on defined criteria, such as extent of impact, and continue Lean/Six Sigma trainings.
Manage the completion of the 2013 Neighbor Survey.
Participate in ICMA benchmarking for FY 2013.
Produce quarterly reports to the City Commission detailing milestone-based progress with the
FY2014 Commission Annual Action Plan initiatives.

98 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Manager’s Office
Structural Innovation, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURE
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery (IS
11-3)
Department
Objective
Improve
service
delivery
(IS 11-3)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Number of formal process
improvements events conducted

*

3

6

6

Number of innovation webinars held

*

13

36

24

Number of employees with Lean/Six
Sigma certification

*

*

74

201

Performance Measures

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The number is reduced to introduce Green Belt level training; a higher level of expertise.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 99

City Manager’s Office
Budget/CIP and Grants

Division Description
Budget/CIP and Grants provides budgetary support services to all City departments in the development of the
City’s Annual Budget. The division prepares revenue and expenditure projections, maintains a Budget
Preparation Guide, and implements budget monitoring and controls, all focusing on long-range forecasts,
trends analysis, and for the development of strategic planning. The division is also responsible for conducting a
monthly financial analysis of the City’s revenues and expenses through the use of the Monthly Financial
Reports.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments













Awarded Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) Distinguished Budget Award, 321 points
out of possible 372 points.
Created and produced the FY 2014 Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle workflow map and
narrative to communicate a new comprehensive approach.
Contracted with a firm to develop a Five Year Financial Forecast and Ten year fiscal outlook.
Adopted a new methodology for Full Cost Allocation to determine the cost to provide internal services
to other funds.
Conducted a comprehensive evaluation of the City’s Capital Projects Portfolio.
Revamped the Budget Document for improved readability for Commission, neighbors, and staff.
Instituted a Revenue Estimating Conference Committee, a robust, third-party examination of revenue
sources to provide insight and third party credibility for long-term financial planning.
Designed and implemented an electronic Audit Compliance Tracking System (ACTS).
Enhanced the Grants Management Tracking System (GMTS) to include monthly reporting, improved
citywide communication, and grants compliance oversight.
Researched and published a Fiscal Capacity Study and Revenue Manual, expanding the understanding
of the current fiscal condition of the City and associated revenue streams.
Conducted an annexation study of unincorporated neighborhoods, assessing potential economic and
service level impacts.
Updated the Grants Policies and Procedures manual to include proactive and efficient grant planning,
administration, management.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives




Advance the FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priorities: Structurally Balanced Budget and
Financial Principles, including Financial Integrity Principles and Policies.
Implement system efficiencies in the Financial System Budget Module.
Update the User Fee Study to evaluate the actual cost of providing user fee related services.

100 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Manager’s Office

Budget/CIP and Grants, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective

Increase
governmental
financial
accountability
(IS 12-1)

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Increase in the Awarded points for
Government Finance Officers Association
Distinguished Budget Award (372
maximum points)

315

334

321

335

Percentage of budget transfers
researched, analyzed, and approved
within two business days

*

*

95%

90%

Number of training hours provided to
staff (citywide) on budget process,
grants management, and audit
compliance

*

*

44

30

Number of grants awarded as a
percentage of total grant applications

*

*

*

50%

Value of grants awarded as a percentage
of total value of grant applications

*

*

*

75%

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 101

City Manager’s Office
Neighbor Support
Division Description
Neighbor Support is a central resource to address neighbor and City Commission requests for information and
services. The Division proactively works to build an approachable government across all segments of the
community by actively listening and responding to the community.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments














Coordinated Power of One Hour event in Poinciana Park that brought together 14 civic associations,
dozens of business and non-profits, and over a hundred neighbor volunteers to clean up the Poinciana
Park neighborhood and install median improvements. The affiliated value of improvements was in
excess of $19,000.
Processed over 3,500 neighbor or City Commission inquiries and concerns in 2012/2013.
Acknowledged our neighbor’s inquiries with 24 hours and provided expedited response.
City Commission awarded 15 Neighborhood Capital Improvement Project (NCIP) grants and 4 Business
Capital Improvement Projects (BCIP) grants to our communities in 2012.
Completed construction of 6 NCIP projects.
Attended over 225 neighbor and business community meetings throughout the year.
Served on the Board of Directors for the Florida Neighborhoods Conference.
Launched the social media tool Nextdoor and currently have 44 neighborhoods and 1,359 neighbors on
the site.
Coordinated, through Public Works, the design and construction of over 40 neighborhood and business
projects in our communities.
Re-established Neighbor Support night in conjunction with the Council of Fort Lauderdale Civic
Associations.
Worked with non-recognized neighborhoods to get them officially recognized through the City
Commission officer, thereby making them eligible for NCIP grants.
Created an Online Block Party Kit to serve as a central resource for our neighbors.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Administer the NCIP and BCIP grant programs.
Administer the Community Gardens grant program.
Administer both an internal and external volunteer service program designed to connect the skills of
employees and neighbors with needs in our community.
Implement “The Volunteer Services Network Project”, which is a “Re-Engage for Good” program made
possible by a grant from the Community Foundation of Broward.
Create a new newsletter format to increase information provided to our neighbors.
Will recommend to the City Commission to award 17 new NCIP and 4 new BCIP grants.

102 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Manager’s Office
Neighbor Support, continued

Department
Objective

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Increase neighbor engagement and improve communication networks within and
among neighborhoods (NE 5-1)
-Enhance the beauty, aesthetics, and environmental quality of neighborhoods (NE
5-2)
FY 2011 FY 2012 FY 2013
FY 2014
Performance Measures
Actual
Actual
Target
Actual
Number of formally recognized
Neighborhood Associations in the city

Increase
neighborhood
communication
and participation
(NE 5-1)

Improve
neighborhood
aesthetics
(NE 5-2)

63

64

471

68

200

250

289

3602

3,255

3,300

2,7813

2,800

Number of Neighborhood Associations
on Nextdoor

*

*

55

50

Number of neighbors on Nextdoor

*

*

2,155

2,000

*

*

7,287

4,500

15

15

17

17

4

4

4

4

*

*

*

10

Number of Neighbor Support outreach
efforts at Neighborhood Association
meetings
Number of neighbor inquiries, referrals
and requests addressed

Number of neighbor posts on
Nextdoor
Number of Neighborhood Community
Investment Program (NCIP) grants
awarded
Number of Business Community
Investment Program (BCIP) grants
awarded
Number of Neighborhood Volunteer
projects

* This is a newly identified performance indicator. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1

The decrease in the number of formally recognized neighborhood associations in the city is partially believed to be a result of
associations not reapplying each year through the Mayor’s Office. Neighbor Support is actively working on contacting each
association to encourage them to become recognized associations.
2
The office expects to see an increase in the number of neighbor support outreach as a result of the new volunteer initiatives and
an overall increase in citywide outreach efforts.
3
The number of neighbor inquiries, referrals, and requests addressed has decreased in FY 2013 and is anticipated to be lower in
future years as a result of streamlining the neighbor inquiries process and by having increased Neighbor Support visibility at
neighborhood association meetings and other community events.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 103

City Manager’s Office
Public Affairs
Division Description
Public Affairs oversees the City’s communication initiatives. The division educates and informs residents,
visitors, businesses and employees about City services, activities and programs. Using targeted
communication strategies, Public Affairs engages the community in the governmental process, enhances
tourism, supports local industries, stimulates redevelopment, promotes business attraction and retention,
increases participation in city programs and activities to generate additional revenue, and strengthens quality
of life.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments






Provided extensive support as part of the Core Staff Team for the City’s 2035 Visioning initiative
including new community outreach efforts, social media, events, graphic design, and assisting in the
development and production of Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale, Our City, Our Vision 2035.
Created a multi-media marketing campaign to promote the new “Mix It. Curb It.” single stream
recycling program, resulting in a 40% increase in residential recycling.
Marketed the City’s first Transportation Summit to bring together experts to discuss mobility and
sustainability solutions.
Completed a two-year community outreach initiative for the Sistrunk Boulevard Infrastructure
project culminating with the grand opening of the community’s first major grocery store.
Coordinated groundbreaking and grand opening ceremonies for Orange Bowl Field at Carter Park,
generating national media exposure for the City.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives






Produce community events including Light Up Sistrunk, Light Up the Beach, Orange Bowl Downtown
Countdown, St. Patrick’s Parade & Festival, Great American Beach Party, 4th of July Spectacular, “A
Walk Through History,” and Midtown Summerfest.
Redesign the City’s website and developing a new citywide newsletter.
Develop a citywide social media policy and launching social media tools including Twitter, Facebook,
and a permanent interactive social ideation website.
Work with the Economic Development division to target public and private sector investment in the
Sistrunk Corridor, Northwest, Central City and Beach Community Redevelopment Authorities.
Implement communication, marketing and outreach initiatives for the A1A roadway restoration and
beach renourishment project.

104 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Manager’s Office
Public Affairs, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Continuously improve and innovate communication and
service delivery (IS 11-3)
-Celebrate our community through special events and sports
(PP 4-2)
Department
Objective
Provide
quality and
timely
information
to our
community
(IS 11-3)

Promote a
positive
image for
Fort
Lauderdale
(PP 4-2)

Performance Measures
Number of media inquiries
addressed
Percentage of media inquiries
addressed within 24-hours
Number of website subscribers
and social media followers
(cumulative totals)
Percentage of customers
“satisfied” or “very satisfied”
with City communications
Number of special events,
programs and projects supported
Number of media releases
produced
Percentage of media releases
used by communication outlets

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

2,225

2,205

1,4031

1,400

100%

100%

100%

100%

*

*

6,425

5,600

*

*

48%

55%

230

214

258

250

*

*

570

570

*

*

97%

90%

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Media inquiries often include multiple follow-up questions on a single topic. Follow-up calls were not counted in FY 2013
(which accounts for the lower number of calls) and will not be counted moving forward.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 105

City Manager's Office
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         4,191,141 $         4,286,272 $         4,623,459 $            337,188

Percent 
Difference
7.9%

Total Funding

$         4,191,141 $         4,286,272 $         4,623,459 $            337,188

7.9%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Administration

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,757,672 $         1,234,519 $         1,291,193 $               56,675

Structural Innovation

                       ‐

Budget/CIP and Grants

           1,136,017            1,066,142            1,083,617                  17,475

Neighborhood Support

                       ‐

               557,361                718,617                161,256

28.9%

Public Affairs

           1,297,452                910,760            1,031,048                120,288

13.2%

Total Expenditures

$         4,191,141 $         4,286,272 $         4,623,459 $            337,188

7.9%

               517,490                498,984                (18,506)

Percent 
Difference
4.6%

‐3.6%
1.6%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         3,685,601 $         3,829,882 $         4,153,931 $            324,049

Percent 
Difference
8.5%

Operating Expenses

               505,540                456,390                469,528                  13,138

2.9%

Total Expenditures
$         4,191,141 $         4,286,272 $         4,623,459 $            337,188
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐)

7.9%

Personal Services:
   Increase in personal service due to the transfer in of a Chief Service Officer position from the 
   Human Resources Department and other personnel related salary adjustments
Operating Expenses:
   Increase in advertising, marketing, printing, photography, video production, supplies and 
   equipment for City events
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget includes prior year purchase order encumbrances 

106 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

$            225,462

                 35,000
                   1,552

Other Governmental Expenditures - General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         5,058,830 $       13,467,781 $       16,711,983 $         3,244,202

Percent 
Difference
24.1%

Total Funding

$         5,058,830 $      13,467,781 $      16,711,983 $         3,244,202

24.1%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Administrative Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Actual
Amended
Adopted
$         1,374,454 $                          ‐ $                          ‐

Dollar 
Difference
$                          ‐

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

Finance

           2,690,568          11,577,091          14,966,021            3,388,930

29.3%

Human Resources 

               212,085                847,539                684,000              (163,539)

‐19.3%

Insurance

               781,722            1,043,151            1,061,962                  18,811

1.8%

Total Expenditures

$         5,058,830 $      13,467,781 $      16,711,983 $         3,244,202

24.1%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$           (164,477) $             (70,422) $            343,805 $            414,227

Percent 
Difference
‐588.2%

Operating Expenses

           5,223,306          13,187,037          16,368,178            3,181,141

24.1%

Debt Services

                       ‐

               351,166                        ‐

             (351,166)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures
$         5,058,830 $      13,467,781 $      16,711,983 $         3,244,202
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

24.1%

Personal Services:
   Decrease in social security funds related to Section 125 exemptions, such as  health and life
   insurance and legal Fees

$            219,705

Operating Expenses:
   Increase due to the updated ITS Cost Allocation study

           3,000,000

Debt Service:
   Decrease due to a one time interest expense

 
             (351,166)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 107

Other Governmental Expenditures -Sunrise Key
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Sunrise Key Safe Neighborhood Fund ‐ 112
Total Funding

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
 $              73,651   $              79,500   $              75,000   $               (4,500)

Percent 
Difference
‐5.7%

$               73,651 $               79,500 $               75,000 $                (4,500)

‐5.7%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Finance

FY 2012
Actual
$               73,651

FY 2013
Amended
$               79,500

FY 2014
Adopted
$               75,000

Dollar 
Difference
$                (4,500)

Percent 
Difference
‐5.7%

Total Expenditures

$               73,651 $               79,500 $               75,000 $                (4,500)

‐5.7%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Operating Expenses
Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
Actual
$               73,651

FY 2013
Amended
$               79,500

FY 2014
Adopted
$               75,000

Dollar 
Difference
$                (4,500)

Percent 
Difference
‐5.7%

$               73,651 $               79,500 $               75,000 $                (4,500)

‐5.7%

Operating Expenses:
   No major variances
 
 

108 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

 

 

Finance Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 58.2

ADMINISTRATION
Director of Finance
Deputy Director of Finance
Administrative Aide

ACCOUNTING &
FINANCIAL REPORTING
Controller
Senior Accountant
Accountant II
Accountant I
Accounts Payable Supervisor
Senior Accounting Clerk
Accounting Clerk
Payroll Supervisor

1
1
1

UTILITY BILLING &
COLLECTIONS

PROCUREMENT
1.2
2
5
1
1
3
4
1

Manager Procurement & Contracts
Senior Procurement Specialist
Procurement Specialist II
Procurement Specialist I
Purchasing Assistant
Administrative Assistant I

1
1
4
1
1
1

1
1
2
8
8
2

BUSINESS TAX

REVENUE & DEBT
Senior Accountant
Accountant II
Senior Accounting Clerk

Revenue Collection Supervisor
Senior Accounting Clerk
Sr. Customer Service Representative
Customer Service Representative II
Customer Service Representative I
Clerk III

1
2
1

Clerk III
Customer Service Representative II

1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 109

Finance Department
Administration
Division Description
Finance Administration works to safeguard the City’s assets, financial affairs, and provide for the long-term
financial stability, integrity and accountability of resources. This is achieved through the sharing of information
and promoting sound fiscal and operational practices. The City’s investment portfolio is an estimated $500
million, which is managed by the Finance Administration Division.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments

 Completed the citywide fixed assets physical inventory and recorded revised values to the proper funds
to resolve prior years audit findings and provide a stable data base.
 Completed the issuance of Pension Obligation Bonds for $337 million.
 Implemented a Fuel Cost Stabilization Program to provide budgetary stability for the cost of fuel used by
the City.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives
 Complete transition for the Merchant Credit Card Contract from previous vendor to provide our
neighbors the ability to pay the City using a credit card.
 Complete the Parking System bonds financing for the Aquatic Center as part of the overall renovation
project.
 Revamp the City’s delinquent accounts receivable collections process to provide a higher level of
collections.
 Complete a needs analysis for financial software applications in anticipation of an overhaul of the City’s
current computer applications. This will eliminate standalone applications that require significant
reconciliation and human intervention to complete transaction processing.
 Implement monitoring procedures for financial integrity principles.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures
Complete citywide fixed asset
inventory

Increase
governmental
financial
accountability
(IS 12-1)

Bond ratings evaluation by
National Bond Rating Agency:
General Obligation2
-Revenue
Bond ratings evaluation by
National Bond Rating Agency:
Revenue2

1

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

0

50%

100%

N/A1

AA

AA-

AA

AA

AA

AA-

AA+

AA+

This initiative has been completed; therefore it will no longer be tracked in the future.
The National Bond Rating Agency reported is Standard & Poor’s

2

110 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Finance Department

Accounting and Financial Reporting
Division Description
Accounting and Financial Reporting ensures that financial transactions are properly recorded in accordance with
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). The
division is responsible for providing departments and the public with timely financial information to assure
accuracy, accountability and transparency. The division processes bi-weekly payroll in-house for employees and
monthly for retirees; vendor payments weekly; monitors and performs reconciliations of Federal, State and Local
grants; monitors capital and non-capital project expenditures; maintains fixed assets records; and reconciles
bank and trust accounts. Reporting mechanisms include monthly financial data for the City Manager’s Office;
quarterly payroll tax reports; State of Florida Annual Financial Report; Annual Single Audit Report; and
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR).

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments
 Completed the single audit in conjunction with the annual audit, which allows the City to mitigate
future findings by implementing corrective actions.
 Reduced the number of single audit findings from 11 findings to one new finding.
 Implemented new vendor payment card process for FPL bills, which resulted in increased purchasing
card (P-card) rebate.
 Converted 99% of employees to electronic payments for direct deposit.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives
 Create an Other Post-employment Benefits (OPEB) Trust to reduce the City’s annual OPEB liability.
 Implement a paperless pay advice process and an employee pay card program to reduce paper use and
enhance employee access.
 Implement vendor Automated Clearing House (ACH) payment process.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 111

Finance Department

Accounting and Financial Reporting, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Increase
payment and
payroll
efficiency
(IS 12-1)

Percentage of employees/retirees
participating with payroll direct
deposit

Ensure
accurate and
prompt
financial
reporting
(IS 12-1)

Number of accounts payable checks
issued
Previous month closed by the sixth
working day of the following
month
Compliance with special audits and
reports

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

95%

99.1%

99%

25,876

21,708

22,428

20,000

*

50%

58.3%1

83%

100%

100%

100%

100%

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Prior year data was not available.
1
For FY 2013, seven months were successfully closed by the sixth working day of the following month, resulting in a FY2013
actual of 58.3%. Further, since the September and October closings are delayed due to the year-end closeout process, 83%
(or 10 months) is the maximum of on-time closings the department can achieve.

112 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Finance Department

Utility Billing and Collection

Division Description
Utility Billing and Collection is responsible for the accurate and timely billing and collection of utility bills,
special assessments, and miscellaneous account receivables on a monthly basis, as well as the annual billing
and collection of the business tax renewable forms. Additional responsibilities include lien searches and
applying liens to delinquent utility accounts. The division also provides the accurate posting of the City’s cash
collection and the timely upload to the City’s Financial Accounting Management Information system (FAMIS).
Utility Billing and Collection strives to deliver excellent services to neighbors paying for utility services and
business taxes.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments




Implemented IVR delinquent dial out, notifying neighbors via telephone of delinquency.
Implemented issues data base for tracking the “Save a Tree” campaign.
Increased customer use of payment methods: ACH (direct draft), IVR (pay by phone) and Web.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Implement Customer Self Service for on-line utility customer use.
Work with Cayenta (utility billing software system) developers to develop and implement the
Workflow process to automate the adjustment process, which will make all adjustments follow an
electronic approval path from employee to supervisor, eliminating the paper stream.
Develop the Cayenta Dashboard. Any data in this database has the capability of being captured on a
graph, pie chart, etc., providing an at-a-glance look at statistics. This will allow supervisors or
managers to see specific needs for ways to increase revenue, or needs for increased staffing for the
phones based on number of calls.
Complete an analysis for restructuring the Business Tax Division from the Department of Sustainable
Development to Finance, in order to streamline the application process, so that more can be done
electronically.
Increase the Business Tax fees to increase the Business Tax revenue and allow the department to look
at ways to outsource the collection of delinquencies in the Business Tax area.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 113

Finance Department

Utility Billing and Collection, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Increase utility
billing revenue Percentage of
collection
uncollectible utility bills
(IS 12-1)

Increase user
friendly
payment
options
(IS 12-1)

Number of methods for
communicating payment
options offered to our
customers
Number of utility
customers that use
Automated Clearing house
(ACH), Web pay, and IVR
(pay by phone )

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

2.56%

2.60%

4.16%1

2.45%

*

3

7

72

*

10,093

15,324

16,000

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Prior year data was not available.
1
The FY 2013 actual percentage exceeds the department’s original FY 2013 projection of 2.5% due to the lack of a
write-off policy and a reduced amount collected through the collection agency. The department will be implementing
an added collection process before sending accounts to the collection agency, and will also aggressively pursue
previously uncollected bills in an effort to bring this number back down.
2
The FY 2014 Target has been increased from six to seven due to an un-projected increase in the number of new
methods for communicating payment options offered to our customers.

114 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Finance Department
Revenue and Debt

Division Description
The Revenue and Debt Division is responsible for the City’s investment portfolio, debt activity and cash
management. The division facilitates the City’s debt issuances, including obtaining credit ratings. It also works
with external advisors, investment managers, bond counsel and financial advisors to ensure compliance with
securities regulations. The Division is also responsible for recording and reporting revenue properly,
accurately and timely in the City’s accounting system.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments

 Transitioned the City’s investments from two Investment Managers to four Investment Managers
under the direction of an Investment Advisor to ensure safety, maintain liquidity and maximize return
on the City’s investments.
 Ensured all major revenues received were accurate and recorded timely.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives






Continue to establish procedures and streamline the City’s debt management.
Complete the transition of banking services to a new service provider.
Monitor investment activity of the four Investment Managers to ensure policy compliance.
Implement a third party Custodial Service agreement for investments.
Review all outstanding debt issues to ensure City compliance with Bond Covenants.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective

Maximize the
city investment
portfolio and
reduce debt
interest
(IS 12-1)

Performance Measures
Number of quarterly and annual
investment
reports submitted to the
Investment Committee and the
City Commission
Debt payments made and
recorded on time
Compliance with investment
policy and guidelines
Average rate of return earned
from City investments
Compliance with bond covenant
requirements

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

1

4

4

4

100%

100%

100%

100%

*

100%

100%

100%

*

0.45%

0.37%

0.50%1

100%

100%

100%

100%

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Prior year data was not available.
1
The FY 2013 target was overly optimistic as the market was not performing well. The FY 2014 target was lowered to
align with the realistic performance of the market.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 115

Finance Department
Procurement
Division Description
The Procurement Services Division assists all City departments with the purchase of goods and services. Per
the Purchasing Ordinance Sec. 2-171 – 2-191 it is necessary that commodities and contractual services of
suitable standards and in sufficient quantities be available as needed and that such items be purchased at the
best prices available, consistent with City standards of service and quality.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments
 Increased usage on the City’s Purchasing Card (P-Card) from $3,625,581 to $18,582,612.
 Received the National Procurement Institute’s 17th Annual Achievement of Excellence in
Procurement Award.
 Participated in the 15th Annual Reverse Trade Show for the Southeast Florida’s Chapter of National
Institute of Governmental Purchasing (NIGP).
 Conducted two successful online auctions of surplus property for the total revenue to the City in the
amount of $310,501.05.
 Received the Achievement of Excellence for Agency Certification Award by the Universal Public
Procurement Certification Counsel (UPPCC).
 Continue to administer over 450 contracts for various services and commodities, representing the
efficient expenditure in excess of $83 million.
 Revised the Procurement Ordinance to increase thresholds for better efficiency.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives

 Transfer of construction projects/bids from Public Works Department/Engineering Division to
Procurement Division.
 Expand the Companion Payment Solutions Program (FPL & P-Card) to other vendors to maximize PCard rebate.
 Participant in the design and implementation of citywide Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system.
 Implementation of “Amazon.com” like market place shopping cart web portal using U.S. Communities
comparison software provides a City web portal of various contracts using U. S. Communities
Software that allows City departments to compare best pricing for products and services.

116 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Finance Department
Procurement, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Achieve excellent procurement services through technological advancements,
improved procedures and outreach programs (IS 12-2)
Department
Objective

Performance Measures
P-card rebates (calendar
year)
P-card purchase dollar
amount

Increase the
usage
Purchasing
(P)-cards
(IS 12-2)

(*includes E-payable
3
payments)

P-card volume as a
percentage of all goods
and services4
Number of solicitations
issued5
Percent central
purchasing division FTEs
of total organization
FTEs6

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

$60,190

$267,8351

$395,0002

$260,000

$3,625,581

$18,582,612

$23,666,504

5.24%

22.20%

28.57%

20%

*

*

189

200

.44%

.40%

.36%

.40%

$19,000,000

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Prior year data was not available.
1
The FY2012 Actual has been adjusted from $250,865 to $267,835 to reflect the October, November, and December CPS p-card rebates we
received after the FY2013 budget book was finalized; the FY 2012 Actual represents the months of January through December 2012.
2
Actual p-card rebates for calendar year 2013 is an estimated amount; rebates will not be received in full until February 2014.
3
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The FY 2012 reported average is $5,043,377.27.
4
This measure is benchmarked by FBC. The FY 2012 reported average is 14.71%.
5
This measure is benchmarked by FBC. The FY 2012 reported average is 83.87.
6
This measure is benchmarked by FBC. The FY 2012 reported average is 0.58%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 117

Finance Department
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         6,623,830 $         6,749,138 $         6,885,623 $            136,485

Percent 
Difference
2.0%

Total Funding

$         6,623,830 $         6,749,138 $         6,885,623 $            136,485

2.0%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            572,556 $            540,887 $            556,033 $               15,146

Administration

Percent 
Difference
2.8%

Accounting & Financial 
Reporting
Business Tax

           1,783,333            1,925,525            1,857,823                (67,702)

‐3.5%

                            ‐                140,546                170,679                  30,133

21.4%

Utility Billing & Collections

           2,182,262            2,230,103            2,106,815              (123,288)

‐5.5%

Revenue & Debt

               700,389                796,112            1,041,898                245,786

30.9%

Procurement

           1,385,290            1,115,965            1,152,375                  36,410

3.3%

Total Expenditures

$         6,623,830 $         6,749,138 $         6,885,623 $            136,485

2.0%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         5,657,808 $         5,316,465 $         5,315,024 $               (1,441)

Operating Expenses

               966,022            1,432,673            1,570,599                137,926

9.6%

Total Expenditures
   
 FY 2014 Major Variances 
(+/‐): 

$         6,623,830 $         6,749,138 $         6,885,623 $            136,485

2.0%

 Operating Expenses: 
    Increase due to anticipated cost of external audit 
    The FY 2013 Amended 

118 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

$            106,357
                 55,597

Fire-Rescue Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 449.4

OPERATIONS

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
Fire Chief
Deputy Fire Chief
Division Chief
Fire Marshal
Battalion Chief
Fire Lieutenant
Fire Safety Lieutenant
Fire Inspector II
Fire Inspector I
Ocean Rescue Chief
Beach Patrol Lieutenant
Beach Lifeguard
Administrative Aide
Clerk III
Data Control Clerk
Department Budget Coordinator
Dom Prep & Emergency Mgmt Coord
Senior Accounting Clerk
Secretary II
Secretary I
Service Clerk
Storekeeper III
Storekeeper II
Storekeeper I

1
3
1
1
6
3
6
4
3
1
7
40.3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
4
1
1
1

Division Chief
Battalion Chief
Fire Lieutenant
Driver-Engineer
Firefighter
Event Worker/Details

3
12
74
75
190
2.1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 119

Fire-Rescue Department
Administration
Division Description
The Fire-Rescue Administration Division provides leadership for the Fire-Rescue Department. The division sets
policies, standard operating procedures, establishes protocols, and works closely with other City departments
and stakeholders to provide the highest possible levels of service to the citizens of Fort Lauderdale.
Administration also manages the efforts and delivery of services for Ocean Rescue, Domestic Preparedness and
Emergency Management, Financial Management, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Administration, the FireRescue Training Bureau, Fire Prevention Bureau, Support Services Bureau, and Communications and Dispatch
services.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments











Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (CEMP) guides City efforts to prepare for, respond to,
mitigate, and recover from emergency and disasters.
The Emergency Management Coordinator received final approval to be a FEMA Instructor. This allows
the Emergency Manager to deliver national emergency management training in support of FEMA’s
mitigation, response, recovery, and preparedness programs.
The volunteer Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) competed in the first annual CERT
Citywide Competition. This event increased member coordination, knowledge, skills and abilities.
The Continuity of Operations Plans (COOP) was developed to ensure performance of essential functions
such as the ability to operate stations and respond to incidents while under a broad range of
circumstances including natural, manmade, terrorism, CBRNE (chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
and explosive) and many other disaster situations.
Fire Prevention adopted a recognized formula to determine productivity and effectiveness, comparing
the percentage of inspections performed by bureau fire inspectors in commercial occupancies to actual
fire incidents to determine how many fires were prevented or could be prevented by an inspection or a
community outreach program.
As head of the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Fire Marshal was designated “Fire Marshal of the Year” by
the Broward Association of Fire Marshalls.
Achieved consensus with the marine industry to address challenges associated with commercial spraypainting.
Sustained departmental succession planning to ensure that departmental personnel are prepared for all
dimensions of appropriate leadership and operational functionality.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Effectively coordinate Fire Department goals with the City’s Strategic Plan.
Replacement of aging Self Contained Breathing Apparatus to maintain safety standards for Fire
Department personnel.
Replacing the fire boat to address waterway emergencies.
Conducting a full-scale emergency response exercise to identify preparedness capabilities and
deficiencies.
Implementing potentially grant funded National Incident Management System (NIMS) certifications
for all employees to provides a solid foundation across jurisdictions and disciplines to ensure effective
and integrated preparedness, planning and response.
Establishing the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Communities Organized to Respond in
Emergencies (CORE) program, designed to better engage faith-based and community organizations in
planning for, responding to, and recovering from disasters.

120 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fire-Rescue Department
Administration, continued







Implementation and roll-out of computer software to improve managerial oversight, generate
statistical analysis for organizational effectiveness, improve the management of Fire Prevention
financial records and billing, as well as to accommodate daily updates and interfacing of pre-fire
planning information.
Achieving an improved Insurance Service Office (ISO) rating to result in reduced property insurance
premiums for property owners.
Continue efforts to obtain Accreditation by the Center for Public Safety Excellence.
Conduct an Employee and Community Hurricane Preparedness Fair to increase education on
emergency preparedness and mitigation.
Achieve an internationally recognized Certified Emergency Manager designation.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response (PS 9-2)
-Involve neighbors with prevention efforts and emergency preparedness (PS 102)
Department
Objective
Increase drills,
simulations,
and training to
ensure
personnel can
successfully
address
diverse
emergency
challenges
(PS 9-2)
Increase
community
emergency
preparedness
(PS 10-2)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of employees
that have completed the
minimum fire training

*

*

97.71%

100%

Percentage of employees
that have completed the
minimum EMS training

*

*

96.16%

100%

8

20

43

25

42

91

99

80

5,012

4,768

4,449

5,000

Performance Measures

Number of “All Hazards”
training and drills conducted
Number of new Community
Emergency Response Team
(CERT) members trained
Total CERT volunteer hours

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 121

Fire-Rescue Department
Administration, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Involve neighbors with prevention efforts and emergency preparedness (PS 10-2)

Department
Objective

Reduce fire
risk through
prevention
(PS 10-2)

Performance Measures
Percentage of High Index (High
Hazard) Structures inspected
Number of all fire prevention
inspections performed
Number of Fire Plan Reviews
conducted
Value of property loss due to fire2
Percentage of inspected properties
that have structural loss due to fire
Number of fire prevention
community events

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

90%

86%

100%

90%

20,267

24,951

19,5701

23,900

3,259

2,723

3,068

3,300

$3.1 MM

$6.7 MM

$4.5MM

$5.0 MM

*

0.12%

0.18%3

0.15%

46

51

87

60

* This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The number of fire inspections performed is below target due to a reduction in staff assigned to fire prevention.
2
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The FY 2012 reported average is $2,190,779.00.
3
Previous years’ data and future targets have been updated to reflect an improved methodology.

122 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fire-Rescue Department
Fire-Rescue Operations
Division Description
The Operations Division is responsible for providing emergency services to over 43,000 calls each year for 911
emergencies. Calls for service include, but are not limited to: fire suppression; emergency medical responses;
transportation accident responses involving vehicles, trains, aircraft, and boats. Emergency Medical Service
(EMS) response includes medical treatment and transport; hazardous condition mitigation; and/or various
other classified emergencies to the neighbors of the City of Fort Lauderdale, as well as Wilton Manors and
Lazy Lake through inter-local service agreements.
In addition to fire suppression and emergency medical services, the operations division provides special
operations response to the community, including Technical Rescue Team (TRT); Hazardous Materials
(HazMat); Marine and aquatic emergencies; Tactical EMS (medical response) for the Police Department’s
Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) incidents; and Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighting (ARFF) service to the Fort
Lauderdale Executive Airport. Fire-Rescue Operations also assists with fire prevention activities supporting
the Prevention Bureau personnel with annual fixed fire system testing and fire flow inspections for structures
in the City. Additionally, operations personnel are charged with the delivery of public education, community
outreach, and injury prevention lectures and demonstrations in schools, businesses, hospitals, special events,
and homeowner groups. Operations firefighters are responsible for the daily maintenance, serviceability, and
condition of all fire-rescue facilities, apparatus fleet, and ancillary equipment.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments












Continued to have a 0% rate of death by drowning in the life guarded section of Fort Lauderdale beach
during hours of operation.
Successfully staffed over 160 community events, ensuring neighbor safety. These special events
require a great deal of planning and movement of resources to ensure public protection.
Continued expansion of non-emergency Interfacility Transport services to generate revenue and build
upon hospital relationships.
Augmented all Special Event Operational Plans into National Incident Management System (NIMS)
compliance. NIMS is an incident management system for large-scale or multi-jurisdictional incidents. It
establishes a uniform set of processes and procedures that emergency responders at all levels of
government will use to conduct response operations.
Created an EMS module training for all probationary employees. These modules will assist all
probationary employees with familiarization of department EMS protocols, procedures, and rules and
regulations.
Became a Certified Training Center (CTC) with the American Heart Association, the first Fire-Rescue
department in the State approved as a training center in all three disciplines in the last 5 years. This
enables us to teach citizens as well as Public Safety employees in Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS),
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS), and Basic Life Support/Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation
(BLS/CPR).
Implemented several cutting edge medical devices including the video laryngoscopes, EZ-IO devices,
and outfitted four Rescue units with equipment needed for pediatric intensive care transports.
Implemented Shipboard firefighting training for land and water based firefighting.
Conducted an in-house forty-hour Officer Development course for newly promoted and candidate
Lieutenants.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 123

Fire-Rescue Department
Fire-Rescue Operations, continued
FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives








Certify forty-eight paramedics in Critical Care Transport which prepares them to deal with crucial
situations rapidly and with precision using and interpreting advanced onsite medical data.
Increase training, including large-scale Mass Casualty Incidents (MCI) exercises with local fire-rescue
departments and outside agencies to prepare for any potential large conflagration, explosion, or
multi-patient incident.
The Training Bureau will continue to expand the fire and medical training offered to employees to
include: monthly Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) case scenarios, monthly fire performance
objectives that will simulate realistic scenarios in a hand on training (HOT) format, monthly EMS
Hands on Training (HOT) to instruct paramedics on the challenges they face during incidents, and 3Day Tactics & Strategy Symposium given to prospective Company Officers prior to the 2013 Ft.
Lauderdale Fire Expo.
Continue to build the American Heart Association Training Center. The addition of a public training
website will allow the department to advertise and promote the public classes which are offered
monthly for a fee. The website will facilitate the marketing of courses that will be hosted in the
future; it will also allow individuals to pay for these courses on-line.
The Training Bureau will expand its services and outreach programs to the private sector and to our
neighboring fire-rescue agencies to bring firefighting, EMS, and Special Operations courses to the
public and to the surrounding agencies.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response (PS 9-2)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Provide
exceptional fire
rescue response
times
(PS 9-2)

Average Code 3 incidents
response times from dispatch to
first unit on scene
Percentage of Code 3 incidents
with response times within six
minutes
Average medical incident
response time from dispatch to
first transport on scene
Percentage of medical incident
response times within ten
minutes from dispatch to first
transport on scene

124 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2012

FY 2013

FY 2014

Actual

Actual

Actual

Target

04:42

04:36

04:30

04:37

80%

83%

85.6%

90%

05:32

05:06

04:59

05:08

94%

96%

96%

95%

FY 2011

Fire-Rescue Department
Fire-Rescue Operations, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response (PS 9-2)

Department
Objective

Deliver best in
class medical
protocols
(PS 9-2)

Provide superior
quality and multifunctional
emergency
response (PS 9-2)

Performance Measures
Percentage of cardiac arrest
patients arriving at hospital
resuscitated1
Number of Stroke Alerts
identified and provided with
specialized care
Number of STEMI Alerts (heart
attack patients) identified and
provided with specialized care
Total number of fire and EMS
incidents
Percentage of fires confined to
structure of origin2
Number of EMS responses per
1,000 residents3
Number of “Lives Saved” –
Ocean Rescue

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

23.27%

22.95%

21.69%

25%

158

126

140

140

76

85

86

80

42,378

42,648

43,919

44,000

98%

100%

100%

100%

172

166.7

174.9

186

40

178

244

100

1

This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The FY 2012 reported
average is 20.4%.
2
This measure is benchmarked by the ICMA. The FY 2012 reported average for fires contained to structure of origin is
87% for populations between 100,000 and 249,999.
3
This measure is benchmarked by the ICMA. The FY 2012 reported average is 70.5 for populations between 100,000
and 249,999.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 125

Fire-Rescue Department
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       72,515,643 $       63,910,662 $       63,777,748 $           (132,914)

Percent 
Difference
‐0.2%

Total Funding

$      72,515,643 $      63,910,662 $      63,777,748 $           (132,914)

‐0.2%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Office of the Chief

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       13,099,324 $       10,796,823 $       10,094,471 $           (702,352)

Percent 
Difference
‐6.5%

Fire‐Rescue Operations

         59,416,319          53,113,839          53,683,277                569,438

1.1%

Total Expenditures

$      72,515,643 $      63,910,662 $      63,777,748 $           (132,914)

‐0.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       61,971,058 $       54,768,823 $       54,688,795 $             (80,028)

Percent 
Difference
‐0.1%

Operating Expenses

         10,539,584            8,959,543            9,088,953                129,410

Capital Outlay

                   5,000                182,296                        ‐

             (182,296)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures

$      72,515,643 $      63,910,662 $      63,777,748 $           (132,914)

‐0.2%

1.4%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐)
Personal Services: 
   Decrease in personal services due to salary adjustments

$             (80,028)

Operating Expenses:
   Increase in  Fleet vehicle overhead and replacement charges

               177,558

Capital Outlay:
   Decrease due to one time capital outlay purchases

126 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

             (182,296)

Human Resources Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 33

TALENT MANAGEMENT
Director of Human Resources
Talent Manager
Org Develop & Training Coord*
Human Resources Specialist
Personnel Records Specialist
Personnel Analyst
Personnel Assistant
Personnel Services Clerk
Service Clerk
Clerk III
Clerk II
Admin Assistant I
Administrative Aide
Receptionist
Senior Management Fellow

EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1

Professional Standards Coordinator
Secretary III

1
1

RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk Manager
Risk Management Coordinator
Senior Claims Adjuster
Claims Adjuster
Employee Benefits Coordinator
Insurance Benefits Specialist
Safety & Training Coordinator
Safety & Tech Train Specialist
Service Clerk

1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
2

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 127

Human Resources Department
Talent Management
Division Description
The Talent Management Division provides professional and responsive human resource services,
including the hiring, classification, compensation, orientation and training of a diversified workforce.
Outreach extends to the leaders of tomorrow through career expos and mentoring programs, such as
Kids and the Power of Work (KAPOW) and the annual Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP).
Talent Management fosters organizational excellence by providing employees with personal growth and
professional development opportunities. The division monitors compliance with employment labor laws,
City policies and procedures, and collective bargaining agreements.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments





Processed 17,204 employment applications, conducted 113 job recruitments and processed 254
new hires and 114 promotions.
Participated in the Summer Youth Employment Program with Workforce One providing
professional work experience for 70 City of Fort Lauderdale teenagers.
Hosted the Employee Service Awards annual luncheon and quarterly receptions to recognize the
continuous and dedicated years of City service of more than 36 eligible employees.
Conducted a Recruitment and Selection Lean Process Improvement event and fully
implemented an electronic Applicant Tracking system (“We’ve Gone Paperless”), eliminating the
paper application, saving on data entry time, and allowing for easier communication with
departments and applicants.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives








Implement remaining initiatives resulting from the Recruitment and Selection Lean Process
Improvement event.
Modernize the personnel rules.
Develop a citywide succession planning program.
Establish a citywide “We Build Talent” training and development program for employees.
Review and revise all policies, processes and procedures as necessary, including creating
documentation for users at all levels.
Implement the “We Build Community” employee recognition program.
Refine and streamline the performance evaluation process to increase on-time completions.

128 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Human Resources Department
Talent Management, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)
- Improve employee safety and wellness (IS 11-2)
Department
Performance Measures
Objectives
Streamline the
Average number of working days to
recruitment process
complete an external recruitment 1
(IS 11-1)
Increase timely
Percentage of performance evaluations
employee feedback
completed on time2
(IS 11-1)
Minimize
discrimination and Number of employees receiving
harassment
discrimination and harassment training
(IS 11-1)
Improve employee
productivity and
Average hours of training per City
reduce medical and
employee
claims costs
(IS 11-2)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

60

85

47.69

60

36%

28%

22%

36%

126

201

1563

350

*

*

*

12

*

This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The reported FY2012 average
is 38 days for populations between 100,000 and 249,999 and 53 days for all participating jurisdictions.
2
The performance evaluation process will be refined and streamlined in FY2014, which will impact completion times.
3
Due to staffing and availability constraints, training sessions were limited this fiscal year, but will return to normal next year
and the program will be enhanced and expanded.
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 129

Human Resources Department

Employee Relations and Professional Standards
Division Description
Employee Relations and Professional Standards administers collective bargaining agreements with each of the
organizations representing various City employee groups and engages in contract negotiations, problem solving,
grievance administration, and arbitrations. Employee Relations advises and consults with the City Manager on
the interpretation and application of the City’s employment policies and collective bargaining agreements. This
Division enforces workplace standards to ensure that all City employees are treated fairly and in accordance
with equal employment opportunity laws. Employee Relations also serves as the central in-take point for
employees to report workplace incidents and complaints, and facilitates the appropriate referral or handling of
such reports.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments



Began negotiations with both Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) units and the International
Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) for successor collective bargaining agreements.
Began negotiations with Teamsters and Federation units for successor collective bargaining
agreements prior to the expiration of the current agreements.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives





Advance the following FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priority: Pension Restructuring
for Sustainability for Police and Fire.
Develop training for supervisors and managers on interpreting and fairly applying collective
bargaining agreement provisions.
Develop training for supervisors and managers on conducting workplace investigations.
Develop training for supervisors and managers on applying appropriate disciplinary
procedures.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percent of Discrimination Claims filed at
local, state and federal levels resolved in
the City’s favor

*

*

50%

95%

Percent of grievances resolved prior to
arbitration

*

*

81%

95%

176

197

204

208

*

*

99.5%

100%

Department
Objectives
Effectively
address
grievances
(IS 11-1)

Performance Measures

Ensure safe work Number of Department of Transportation
practices
(DOT) Random Screenings Coordinated
(IS 11-1)
Percent of Teamsters employees that
passed random drug screens
*

This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

130 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Human Resources Department
Risk Management
Division Description
Risk Management manages programs in the areas of employee safety, loss prevention, property,
casualty, and employee benefits. Risk Management attempts to protect the City’s physical and financial
assets against loss by maintaining effective insurance programs, minimizing the City’s exposure to risk,
providing for appropriate reserve levels, funding incurred liabilities, and providing for the proper cost
allocation of incurred losses. The division provides internal investigative services on claims arising out of
automobile, general, police professional, and employment practices liability exposures. Risk
Management also monitors workers’ compensation and related legal expenditures being handled by
third party administrators.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments




Opened an Employee Wellness Center to improve employee productivity and reduce medical
claim costs.
Implemented payroll deductions for contributions to a pre-paid college tuition plan to provide
an efficient mechanism for employees to fund this opportunity for their families.
Purchased cyber liability insurance policies to transfer the exposure risk of large claims and
allow for effective budgeting.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives





Create a driver monitoring and accident prevention program to reduce automobile accident
claim costs and improve employee and neighbor safety.
Enhance the Accident Review Board and related policies to improve driver training and reduce
automobile accident claim costs.
Implement a citywide return-to-work program to improve employee productivity and reduce
workers’ compensation claim costs.
Enhance the Benefits self-service program to provide employees with an efficient method of
managing their health and insurance benefits.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 131

Human Resources Department
Risk Management, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Improve employee safety and wellness (IS 11-2)

Department
Objectives

Performance Measures

Percentage of management
employees participating in the
Improve employee
employee wellness plan
productivity and
Number of employee wellness
reduce medical
events (Walk & Jog with Mayor,
and claims costs
Lunch & Learn sessions, cancer
(IS 11-2)
screenings, biometric screenings,
etc.)
Number of new on-the-job
injuries
Reduce and
Percentage of employee driver
effectively manage caused accidents
claims
Number of open casualty claims
(IS 11-2)
Percentage of casualty claims
closed to open inventory
*

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

42%

45%

50%

2

11

23

32

361

327

318

320

54%

56%

49%

50%

636

656

643

635

98%

97%

102%

101%

This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

132 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Human Resources Department
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,184,885 $         2,126,758 $         2,423,782 $            297,024

Percent 
Difference
14.0%

Total Funding

$         2,184,885 $         2,126,758 $         2,423,782 $            297,024

14.0%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Talent Management

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,802,449 $         1,900,755 $         2,189,025 $            288,270

Percent 
Difference
15.2%

Employee Relations

               382,436                226,003                234,757                    8,754

3.9%

Total Expenditures

$         2,184,885 $         2,126,758 $         2,423,782 $            297,024

14.0%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,001,997 $         1,918,189 $         2,104,454 $            186,265

Percent 
Difference
9.7%

Operating Expenses

               182,888                208,569                319,328                110,759

53.1%

Total Expenditures
$         2,184,885 $         2,126,758 $         2,423,782 $            297,024
 
FY 2014 Major Difference (+/‐ ):

14.0%

Personal Services:
   Increase in personnel services expenses for salaries, other personnel related compensation
   and benefits adjustments
   Increase in personnel services expense for a new position ‐ Organizational Development and 
   Training  Coordinator

$            107,932
 
                 84,506

Operating Expenses:
   Increase in operating expenses due to the transfer of citywide training costs from the 
   non‐departmental account into Human Resources
   Increase in General Liability Insurance due to a one time reduction in FY 2013
   Increase in technological enhancements

                 44,954
                 11,243
                 30,000

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 133

Human Resources Department - City Insurance Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

City Insurance Fund ‐ 543

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       18,431,415 $       23,726,407 $       21,380,199 $        (2,346,208)

Percent 
Difference
‐9.9%

Total Funding

$      18,431,415 $      23,726,407 $      21,380,199 $       (2,346,208)

‐9.9%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Health Administration

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         6,497,704 $         6,747,570 $         6,871,771 $            124,201

Percent 
Difference
1.8%

Medical Services

                 53,871                  81,601                  81,000                      (601)

‐0.7%

Risk Management

           1,505,701            5,175,636            3,022,428           (2,153,208)

‐41.6%

Self Insurance Claims

         10,374,139          11,721,600          11,405,000              (316,600)

‐2.7%

Total Expenditures

$      18,431,415 $      23,726,407 $      21,380,199 $       (2,346,208)

‐9.9%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,082,093 $         1,263,118 $         1,309,415 $               46,297

Operating Expenses

         17,349,322          22,463,289          20,070,031           (2,393,258)

‐10.7%

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

100.0%

                       ‐

                      753                       753

Total Expenditures
$      18,431,415 $      23,726,407 $      21,380,199 $       (2,346,208)
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Operating Expenses:
   Increase due to enhancements to the Employee Assistance Program
   Decrease in indirect cost allocation due to updated cost allocation studies
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget includes prior year purchase order encumbrances

134 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Percent 
Difference
3.7%

‐9.9%

$               70,000
          (2,288,784)
               462,249

Human Resources Department - Health Benefits Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Health Benefits Fund ‐ 545

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       22,873,264 $       19,797,426 $       19,876,500 $               79,074

Percent 
Difference
0.4%

Total Funding

$      22,873,264 $      19,797,426 $      19,876,500 $              79,074

0.4%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Self Insured Health Benefits

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       22,873,264 $       19,797,426 $       19,876,500 $               79,074

Percent 
Difference
0.4%

Total Expenditures

$      22,873,264 $      19,797,426 $      19,876,500 $              79,074

0.4%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       22,873,264 $       19,797,426 $       19,876,500 $               79,074

Percent 
Difference
0.4%

Total Expenditures
$      22,873,264 $      19,797,426 $      19,876,500 $              79,074
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

0.4%

Operating Expenses

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease due to one‐time building improvements for the health & wellness center
   Increase is the net effect of the increase of health claims and decrease in the claims administrative
   costs

$           (112,000)
               232,814

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 135

136 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 65.7

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES
ITS Director/Chief Technical Officer
Administrative Assistant II
Clerk III

1
1
1
1.1
2
2
4
3
2
1

INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY SECURITY
Chief Information Sys. Officer
Information Systems Analyst

Communications Manager
Administrative Aide
Assistant Telecom Manager
Clerk III
Communications Technician
Converged Network Admin
Copy Center/Mail Technician
Graphic Services & Mail Supv
Intern
Network Support Analyst
Network Support Technician
Offset Press Operator II
Systems Administrator

1
1
1
0.5
1
1
1
1
0.9
2
1
1
1

1
1

Administrative Assistant I
Copy Center/Mail Technician
Messenger

Systems Administrator
Assistant Systems Administrator
Computer Operations Supervisor
Computer Operator II
Computer Operator I
Database Administrator
Manager of Technical Services
Assistant Database Administrator
Senior Technical Support Analyst
Technical Support Analyst

1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

POLICE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY SERVICES

MAIL SERVICES

GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS
(GIS)
Geographic Information Sys. Mgr.
Geographic Info. Sys. Specialist
GIS Applications Developer
GIS Analyst

INFRASTRUCTURE & OPERATIONS

COMMUNICATIONS

APPLICATION SERVICES
Manager of Distributed Systems
Customer Support Administrator
Data Warehouse Analyst
Intern
Senior Technical Support Analyst
Senior Technology Strategist
Technical Support Analyst
Technical Support Coordinator II
Technology Strategist
Web Engineer

1
1
1

1
1.2
1

Police Information Tech. Mgr.
Administrative Aide
Senior Technical Support Analyst
Senior Technology Strategist
Systems Administrator
Technical Support Analyst
Technology Strategist
Mobile Data Technology Admin.

1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

1
2
1
2

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 137

Information Technology Services Department
Administration
Division Description
Administration provides overall management services and coordination for the Information Technology
Services (ITS) Department. The division also oversees budget and commission agenda coordination,
contract administration, purchasing, accounts payable, and payroll for the ITS department. Additionally,
the division has begun to build and maintain an information privacy and security-conscious culture and
infrastructure for the City. This effort includes developing and administering the City’s information
privacy and security policy, strategy and vision, assessing privacy and security risks, and coordinating
information privacy and security efforts across the City.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments









Completed Five-Year Strategic Plan and presented to City Commission.
Began development of a Social Media Policy for all City employees.
Implemented Department staff reorganization.
Selected an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System consultant.
Completed Network Vulnerability Assessment.
Began extensive recruitment of new Chief Information Security Officer.
Began development of Security Policy recommendations.
Began addressing security issues identified by the Network Vulnerability Assessment.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives








Begin succession planning.
Complete implementation of a Social Media Policy for all City employees
Explore the creation of a call center, by developing a new Customer Relationship Management
(CRM) tool to track and address general questions and non-emergency calls from neighbors for
City services.
Hire a Chief Information Security Officer and an Information Security Analyst.
Create a governance board to oversee technology decisions.
Purchase Information Technology Security hardware and software.
Continue addressing security issues identified by the Network Vulnerability Assessment and
developing security policies.

138 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Administration, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery
(IS 11-3)
Department
Objective
Increase
strategic and
community
desired
information
technology
services
(IS 11-3)

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Number of departmental
cross-sectional performance
meetings1

*

2

15

12

Number of Employee
Recognition Events

*

8

11

11

Quality of General IT
Services: Percent Rated as
Excellent

*

*

89%

90%

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Information Technology Services will meet at least once per month to discuss department performance, projects,
issues, and challenges.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 139

Information Technology Services Department
Application Services
Division Description
Application Services integrates technology for the effective delivery of City services. A major aspect in
achieving this objective requires the division to provide planning, project management, process review,
implementation, and support for all computer applications, in addition to providing support for all of the
personal computers and laptops operated by city staff. Application Services also provides support for
the enterprise computer applications, operating systems and over fifty other software programs used
throughout the City. Additionally, the division manages the City’s internet sites that provide online
payment and services to neighbors, including water bills, business taxes, parking tickets and registration
fees for Parks and Recreation. Other online services include plan reviews, building permits, community
inspection information, and resident parking permits.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments










Upgraded the City’s television channel, FLTV, to a programmed content system that incorporates
full video public service announcements in addition to the informational screens.
Implemented new help desk software, Track-IT, to more precisely track calls for service and
properly manage resources.
Established Technology Meetings that are held every few months to discuss new hardware,
software and trends in technology and how they relate to what we are trying to accomplish as a
City.
Coordinated implementation of the Granicus Legistar system which automates the creation of
City Commission agendas and links with the video stream of the meetings. This allows neighbors
to view agendas and click on the item(s) they are interested in to automatically view those
portions of the video meeting.
Established a Personal Computer (PC) replacement plan to replace PCs around the City that have
exceeded their useful life.
Automated Utility Billing courtesy turn off calls to alert neighbors whose service is scheduled for
disconnection for non-payment.
Enhanced the Grants Management Tracking System to link data from the financial management
system and provide more reporting options to City management, ensuring audit compliance and
accuracy for the various programs and grants the City administers.
Enhanced the Online Budget Preparation system to expedite departmental budget preparation
by pre-populating data from the financial management system and clone request forms from
prior years to eliminate data entry errors. The ability to attach supporting documents and
numerous new reports were created to reflect the current budget methodology and priorities.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives






Develop specifications and requirements for the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems
evaluation, to begin moving toward a comprehensive, integrated financial management system.
Expansion of Kronos timekeeping system citywide to eliminate manual timekeeping efforts and
automate the transfer of data to the payroll system.
Replace all remaining Windows XP based computers with Windows 7 operating system software
and upgrade all remaining Microsoft Office software to Office 2010.
Upgrade the City’s official website.
Begin implementation of a citywide scanning and Electronic Document Management System
(EDMS).

140 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Application Services, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-To provide a reliable and progressive technology infrastructure (IS 11-4)

Department
Objective
Provide
excellent
technical
support and
training to
internal
customers
(IS 11-4)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

67%

65%

54%

60%

88%

84%

77%

83%

Number of training classes
on various subjects

12

24

76

30

Number of “Tech tips”
provided to all employees.

*

5

4

6

Performance Measures
Percentage of help desk
repair calls resolved at time
of call1
Percentage of help desk
repair calls resolved within
24-hours

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The FY 2012 reported
average is 40%.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 141

Information Technology Services Department
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
Division Description
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) provides geospatial services to City staff, neighbors, businesses,
and visitors. The division creates and maintains data, maps, and software applications to provide
information in a useable format. Additionally, the GIS Division creates tools to leverage information
from other systems such as utility billing, and Community Plus. GIS also maintains the data that
supports the City’s 911 dispatch system.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments









Our in-house developed Parks and Recreation Finder web application was featured in Esri’s
October, 2012 issue ArcWatch magazine, and our web applications built on the ArcGIS for Local
Government initiative were featured in the Spring 2013 issue of Esri’s ArcUser magazine.
Performed analytical and map creation functions for the effort to redistrict City Commission
Districts.
Created a Police Jurisdiction Guide web application to assist the patrol officers better
understand their geographic areas of responsibility. The application is being tested by the Police
Department’s mobile unit.
Created a program for bi-directional integration between Cayenta Utilities and GIS. The program
converts relevant Cayenta records into GIS and then pushes property information from the GIS
to Cayenta. This is useful for billing, the collection of lien funds, and notifying property owners
of issues, among other uses.
Produce GIS analysis and mapping to support the City’s efforts to reduce its flood insurance
ratings and net our neighbors approximately $2 million in savings.
Hosted a GIS Day event attended by 150 professionals, neighbors and students of area schools.
The event brought awareness to the City’s GIS activities as well as educated staff on ways to
improve efficiency.
Hosted a 2-week Geocaching contest to raise awareness to the City’s GIS activities.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Upgrade the City’s suite of client and server GIS software from version 10.0 to version 10.2, Esri’s
most current version.
Upgrade the City’s GIS server topology to include virtual servers and create failover between
servers at City Hall, the Emergency Operations Center, and Public Works. This will facilitate
easier upgrades, easier service pack installation, and improved uptime of GIS services.
Implement an Executive Dashboard application to assist senior staff in monitoring spatially
enabled performance indicators.
Implement ArcGIS Online for Organization.
Implement an emergency management reporting and operations dashboard application.
Upgrade ArcIMS web applications to the ArcGIS Server.

142 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery
(IS 11-3)
Department
Objective
Increase
accessibility
of City
services and
information
via web and
mobile
devices
(IS 11-3)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Number of web and mobile
applications introduced,
rebuilt, or enhanced

*

16

2

51

Number of total visits to GIS
applications & GIS website
monthly

*

6,848

7,132

7,100

Performance Measures

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The FY 2014 Target has been reduced to reflect a decrease in the ability to provide the applications due to the
limited availability of upgraded software (by vendor) and the limited resources (staff and funds) of requesting
departments.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 143

Information Technology Services Department
Infrastructure and Operations

Division Description
Infrastructure and Operations is responsible for implementing and supporting all aspects of the City’s
computer servers, databases, email, spam filtering, and user accounts. Currently this consists of
approximately 200 physical and virtual servers, 55 databases, and 2,000 email accounts. The Operations
area handles a multitude of computer-tasks-associated applications such as payroll, budget, utility billing,
and community plus. This division is also responsible for PC, laptop, and application support (such as
Hansen, Kronos, Tokay) for the Public Works Utilities’ operations.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments






Implemented virtual server technology at Public Works replacing equipment that was no longer
under support. The new systems are more fault-tolerant and energy efficient.
Replaced all Windows XP computers at Public Works In preparation for Microsoft ending XP
support in April 2014.
Upgraded the City’s email system to Microsoft Exchange 2010 for better support of smart phones
and larger file attachments and mailbox sizes.
Took over database support for the Police Department for better personnel backup and less
dependency on outside contractors.
Implemented handheld technology for tracking recycling usage in the City.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Continue renovation of the City Hall Data Center by expanding the Uninterruptable Power Supply
(UPS) capabilities to one hour run time and optimizing space requirements for the servers.
Increase online data storage and implement data archiving procedures.
Expand virtual server technology to the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) to serve as a disaster
recovery site and to host GIS applications during EOC activation.
Migrateall databases at Public Works to Microsoft SQL Server for better performance and
support.
Enhance the LauderServ mobile application.
Introduce the Predator Awareness Safety System (PASS).

144 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Infrastructure and Operations, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide a reliable and progressive technology infrastructure (IS 11-4)

Department
Objective
Ensure
infrastructure and
operations are
reliable and
optimized to meet
current and
emerging
technologies
(IS 11-4)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of servers
virtualized

*

40%

60%

48%1

Number of major outages

*

*

3

2

Number of mobile
applications introduced,
rebuilt, or enhanced

*

2

0

2

Performance Measures

*This is a newly identified performance Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The FY 2014 Target has been revised to show a total citywide percentage by including Police IT servers.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 145

Information Technology Services Department
Police Information Technology Services
Division Description
The Police Information Technology Services (ITS) Division uses technology resources to support the mission
of the City of Fort Lauderdale Police Department. This requires research, planning, project management,
process review, implementation and support of software applications and technology systems used by Police
Department personnel. The supported diverse groups of end users include officers on patrol, command
staff, detectives, crime analysts, dispatchers, records staff, and support staff at multiple locations and in the
field.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments






Implemented the BAIR Business Intelligence System to assist with Intelligent Led Policing efforts.
Implemented a State mandated two factor authentication for Patrol laptops.
Deployed a Virtual system in a Blade enclosure for server migration into a more robust, reliable, and
energy efficient environment.
Purchased replacement for the Police Patrol vehicles’ Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) system.
Implemented a new disk-based backup and storage system.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Transition to the County regional Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD), field reporting system, and
records management system.
Provide technical and collaborative support for the IBM First of a Kind (FOAK) City Resource
Optimization Solution pilot for predictive policing.
Complete the Microsoft Exchange virtualization and upgrade, and additional server virtualization.
Implement replacement for the Police Patrol vehicles’ Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) system.
Began deployment of servers into the modular Uninterruptible Power Supply system shared with
Voice over IP phone system.
Continue server virtualization and migration of physical equipment into the modular Uninterruptible
Power Supply racks.

146 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Police Information Technology Services, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Prevent and solve crime in all neighborhoods. (PS 9-1)

Department
Objective
Provide excellent IT
systems to
facilitate 911
communications,
and crime tracking
and analysis
(PS 9-1)

FY 2011

FY 2012

FY 2013

FY 2014

Actual

Actual

Actual

Target

Completion of Uniform
Crime Report (UCR) ontime, accurate, and
accepted by FDLE

50%1

100%

100%

100%

Compliance with State and
FBI IT security, data, and
accreditation audits

100%

100%

100%

100%

Performance Measures

1

During FY 2011, the UCR report was only completed 50% of the time it was due.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 147

Information Technology Services Department
Publishing and Mail Services

Division Description
The City’s in-house Publishing and Mail Services Division is responsible for the production and logistics of
revenue generating printed materials such as water bills, business tax licenses and renewals, police
alarm notices, fire inspection fees, etc. The division also supplies City letterhead, envelopes, business
cards, brochures, postcards and other printed materials for all City departments. Mail Services manages
the collection and distribution network of incoming and outgoing US Mail, City interoffice
correspondence and FedEx and UPS packages. Publishing and Mail Services also administers the
SendSuite e-certified software, updates employee education materials for postage savings, and manages
the citywide copier and vending machine programs.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments








Completed SendSuite software training classes on e-certified letters for Police Department
personnel, maximizing postage savings and increasing efficiency.
The SendSuite software initiative, in its third year, resulted in FY 2011 savings of $19,326 and
FY 2012 savings of $18,142.
Eliminated duplication of services by combining Public Works messenger duties with Mail
Services part-time messengers, resulting in the elimination of two full-time positions.
Finalized negotiations with copier vendors for a cost reduction of the citywide copier program.
Installed healthy vending machines with all natural ingredient choices, citywide.
Acquired a full-color digital press to reduce City departments’, local homeowner associations’,
civic associations’ and non-profit organizations’ printing costs.
Printed Fast Forward Fort Lauderdale, the community’s 2035 Vision Plan.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives



Expand services to non-profit and civic and homeowner’s associations for printed materials.
Revise the price and quantity structure of business cards for City personnel and non-profit
organizations.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1).

Department
Objective
Reduce
operational
costs for mail
and published
materials
(IS 12-1)

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of mail processed
at pre-sort rate.

82%

85%

86%

80%

$19,326

$18,142

$17,181

$19,000

*

*

$7,753

$12,000

Savings from utilizing
electronic certified mail in
place of traditional certified
mail.
City and external customer
savings from the full color
digital press

148 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Radio Communications
Division Description
Radio Communications Services is responsible for the planning, designing, acquisition, implementation,
management and technical support of the City’s mission-critical communications networks such as, radio
infrastructures and the alerting system for Police and Fire. The division is committed to providing cost
effective, efficient and professional technical support services and ensuring reliable, long-term viable
communications technology and federal compliances.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments









Replaced Uninterrupted Power Supply (UPS) at the Playa del Sol communications site.
Replaced the air conditioning unit at the Public Works Utilities communications site.
Completed the Microwave Project.
Implemented the UHF narrowbanding project, a Federal Communications Commission (FCC) mandate.
Secured $98,000 in Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) funding from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a mobile emergency radio system, including adding an interoperable
Gateway & Transportable Data/Voice Satellite System.
Completed the Hosted Master Site Project in conjunction with Broward County; connecting to ASTRO
25 Master Site at Motorola.
Implemented the communication alerting system at Fire Station 35.
Replaced antenna(s) at all communication sites.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives




Replace failing Public Safety 800 MHz Radio System.
Implement Zetron Fire Alerting technology at Fire Station 54 to alert and dispatch Fire-Rescue
personnel to calls.
Complete the 800 Reconfiguration Project, a Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Mandate.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide a reliable and progressive technology infrastructure (IS 11-4)

Department
Objective
Ensure reliable
and interoperable
communications
using current
industry
standards
(IS 11-4)

Performance Measures
Percentage of radio
communications infrastructure
in service, monthly
Percentage of Service Ticket
repairs completed within 24hours1

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

*

95%

99.9%

34.40%

35.06%

61.72%

55%

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible
1
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The FY 2012 reported average is 63%

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 149

Information Technology Services Department
Telephone (Network) Communications
Division Description
Network Communications is responsible for the planning, design, implementation, maintenance and
around the clock support of the City’s wired and wireless computer, telephone and Internet
communications networks. In addition, the team also manages related applications and security systems
such as voicemail, call center, digital signage, video, unified collaborations, firewall, remote access and web
filtering.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments







Completed the upgrade and expansion of the new Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephone
system in the Police, City Hall, Public Works and Emergency Operations Center data centers.
Completed the migration of the Public Works Campus buildings to a centralized and supported
telephone system based on next-generation VoIP standards adopted by the telephone industry.
Completed the implementation of a new centralized UPS system in the Police, City Hall and Public
Works data centers.
Expanded the internal wireless (Wi-Fi) network to several City buildings to provide free Wi-Fi
services to visitors as well as secured Wi-Fi access for City staff.
Assisted with the expansion of the City’s Public Education and Government (PEG) access channel to
the AT&T U-Verse network. Residents with AT&T TV service can now view City meetings and
broadcasts from home on channel 99.
Upgraded the computer networks at 10 City locations from antiquated Integrated Services Digital
Network (ISDN) communications technology to a unified IP network capable of supporting the
increasing demand for voice, video, data and internet communications.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Complete the migration of all remote buildings and call centers from the legacy Nortel telephone
system to the new centralized and supported telephone system based on next-generation VoIP
standards.
Implement a conference room, desktop and mobile video conferencing system to reduce employee
travel time and increase web-based meetings and trainings.
Implement a real-time document, applications, and desktop collaboration system with integrated
audio and video communications aimed at improving staff collaborations and productivity.
Continue to expand the internal wireless (Wi-Fi) network to other City buildings to provide free WiFi services to visitors as well as secured Wi-Fi access for City staff.
Complete the migration of the citywide computer network to a unified IP network capable of
supporting the increasing demand for voice, video, data and Internet communications.
Conduct a test pilot of Wi-Fi in public parks.

150 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Information Technology Services Department
Telephone (Network) Communications, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Provide reliable and progressive technology infrastructure (IS 11-4)

Department
Objective
Increase the
reliability and
efficiency of
workforce and
community
communications
(IS 11-4)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percent of telephone
repair calls resolved
within 24-hours1

80%

67%

72%

80%

Percent of network
repair calls resolved
within 24-hours2

86%

53%

65%

80%

Performance Measures

1

This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The FY 2012
reported average is 71%.
2
This measure is benchmarked by (ICMA). The FY 2012 reported average is 76%.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 151

Information Technology Services (ITS) Department
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
Actual
$         7,323,008

FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$                          ‐ $                          ‐ $                          ‐

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

Central Services Fund ‐ 581

           3,316,907          13,754,662          13,923,024                168,362

1.2%

Total Funding

$       10,639,915

1.2%

$       13,754,662

$       13,923,024

$            168,362

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Administration

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            569,656 $           1,447,400 $           1,927,549 $            480,149

Percent 
Difference
33.2%

Application Services

           2,137,164              3,004,249              3,305,625                 301,376

10.0%

Geographic Info Systems

               433,159                 801,909                 839,870                    37,961
           1,575,563              2,287,039              1,783,204 $             (503,835)
           2,607,466              2,445,854              2,142,684 $             (303,170)

Infrastructure & Operations
Police Information Technology Services
Publishing
Mail Services
Radio Communications
Information Technology Security
Telephone (Network) Communications

               494,750
                       ‐
           1,208,208
                       ‐
           1,613,949

DEPARTMENT TOTALS

$       10,639,915

               451,189                393,115                 (58,075)
                410,216                 460,197                    49,981

           1,313,353            1,216,373                 (96,980)
                       ‐
               186,353                186,353
           1,593,452            1,668,055                  74,602
$       13,754,662

$       13,923,024

$            168,362

4.7%
‐22.0%
‐12.4%
‐12.9%
12.2%
‐7.4%
0.0%
4.7%
1.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services
Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
DEPARTMENT TOTALS
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
Actual
$         6,501,264

FY 2013
Amended
$         7,075,440

FY 2014
Adopted
$         7,266,583

Dollar 
Difference
$            191,143

           3,760,628            5,864,044            6,247,628                383,584
               378,023                815,178                408,813              (406,365)
$       10,639,915

$       13,754,662

$       13,923,024

$            168,362

Percent 
Difference
2.7%

6.5%
‐49.8%
1.2%

Personal Services:
   Decrease in funds for personal services for the removal of part time salaries and other adjustments
$               76,513
   Increase in personnel services expense for two new positions ‐ Information Security Analyst and Mobile Data Technology 
   Administrator
               196,329
Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in funds for radio repair maintenance for Gold Elite Console & Repeaters that are no longer being serviced
   Decrease in funds for other services for a reduction in radio communications service contracts other than Motorola
   Decrease in funds for a Budget Modification for the Authentication Software project
   Decrease in funds for data processing software licenses funds for the Microsoft Exchange project
   Decrease in funds for computer equipment needed to maintain the city‐wide computer infrastructure
   Increase in funds for indirect administrative overhead charges
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget includes prior year purchase order encumbrances
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget includes budget amendments

                (25,000)
                (19,713)
             (110,868)
             (210,754)
                (30,000)
               406,043
               159,028
             (235,198)

Capital Outlay:
   Decrease in funds for computer equipment for a one‐time Budget Modification IT Server upgrade
   Decrease in funds for computer software for a one‐time Budget Modification Microsoft Exchange project
   Increase in funds for computer software for the completion of Kronos Payroll Timekeeping System upgrade
   Increase in funds for equipment expansions for Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) and Data Storage and Backup

             (119,725)
             (368,446)
               215,000
               190,000

152 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks and Recreation Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 424.1

SPECIAL FACILITIES & ADMINISTRATION

RECREATION
Aquatic Complex Manager
Assistant Aquatic Complex Manager
Auditorium Manager
Ball Field Groundskeeper
Clerk III
Field Operations Techniciation (Level IV)
Field Operations Technician (Level III)
Field Operations Technician (Level II)
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Park Ranger II
Park Ranger I
Pool Equipment Mechanic
Pool Lifeguard II
Pool Operations Coordinator
Recreation Program Coordinator
Recreation Programmer II
Recreation Programmer I
Service Clerk
Stage & Operations Manager
PT Event/Recreation Workers

1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
5
2
6
2
2
1
6
18
10
1
1
113.3

1
2
1
3
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
1.7
0.7

PARKS
Parks Foreman
Head Groundskeeper
Ball Field Groundskeeper
Field Operations Technician (Level VI)
Field Operations Technician (Level IV)
Field Operations Technician (Level III)
Field Operations Technician (Level II)
Field Operations Technician (Level I)
Irrigation Repairperson
Munipal Maintenance Worker IV
Municipal Maintenance Worker III
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Pest Control Technician
Small Equip Mechanic I
Administrative Assistant II
Apprentice Municipal Maint. Worker
PT Apprentice Maintenance Worker

FACILITIES MAINTENANCE

MARINE FACILITIES
Supervisor of Marine Facilities
Manager of Marine Facilities
Dockmaster
Marina Attendant II
Marina Attendant I
Senior Accounting Clerk
PT Apprentice Maintenance Worker

Parks and Recreation Director
Deputy Director
Facilities Manager
Community Program Supervisor
Municipal Operations Supervisor
Parks Supervisor
Department Budget Coordinator
Grants & Special Project Coordinator
Landscape Architect
Public Information Specialist
Senior Accounting Clerk
Service Clerk
Administrative Assistant II
Administrative Assistant I
Administrative Aide
Clerk III
Clerk II
PT Admin Aide/Receptionist
PT Homeless Coordinator

1
1
2
2
2
1
1.5

Facilities Maint Foreman
Parks Foreman
Carpenter II
Clerk II
Construction Worker III
Construction Worker II
Electrician
Electrical Assistant
Air Conditioning Technician
Field Operations Technician (Level IV)
Field Operations Technician (Level II)
Field Operations Technician (Level I)
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Painter (Maintenance)
Plumber (Maintenance)
Service Clerk
Administrative Assistant I

6
2
2
1
15
17
5
11
2
1
8
9
2
1
1
4
10.9

SANITATION
1
1
1
1
2
7
6
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

Parks Foreman
Solid Waste Foreman
Solid Waste Supervisor
Code Compliance Officer
Field Operations Technician (Level IV)
Field Operations Technician (Level III)
Field Operations Technician (Level II)
Field Operations Technician (Level I)
Heavy Equipment Operator
Municipal Maintenance Worker IV
Municipal Maintenance Worker III
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Horticulturist
Senior Accounting Clerk
Apprentice Municipal Maint. Worker
Administrative Assistant II

3
2
1
2
8
7
7
19
6
1
5
11
1
1
3
1

REAL ESTATE
Clerk II

1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 153

Parks and Recreation Department
Administration Division
Division Description
The Administration Division provides the leadership and the framework to acquire, operate, and maintain the
City’s system of public places including the beach, parks, open spaces, and medians for neighbors and visitors.
Core services include special event coordination, managing the City’s recreation, marine facilities, sanitation,
cemetery, facilities maintenance, and park rangers.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments



The redevelopment of Stranahan Park included the installation of new native landscaping, enhancing
the overall ascetic beauty of the park, additionally leading to the transformation of a great downtown
public space.
The division added five new parks to the park inventory, increasing community access to parks.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives





Advance the following FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priorities: Comprehensive Homeless
Strategy, the Riverwalk District Plan, Landscape Beautification and Entryway Signage, and increase
Soccer and Lacrosse Athletic Fields.
The development of Lewis Landing, Gore Betz, and the Sailboat Bend/Townsend Parks will be
completed. The opening of the three parks will improve quality of life, and increase the availability of
parks within a ten-minute walk of our neighbors. Lewis Landing Park will additionally increase the
availability of waterfront parks accessible by boat.
A Request for Proposals will be issued to select a qualified Real Estate Brokerage firm to provide
professional services to maximize the best use of City properties. Selected firm will be responsible for
providing advice regarding property valuation, portfolio organization an analysis, strategic planning for
property leasing and disposal, listing services for sale of surplus property, overseeing escrow for sales,
and lease management.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)

Department
Objective

Provide welltrained personnel
(IS 11-1)

Performance Measures
Percentage of staff
trained in National
Incident Management
Systems (NIMS) Training
Modules 100 and 700
Average number of
training hours per FTE
for all parks and
recreation employees1

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

93%

66.21%

100%

*

11

23.56

28

*This is a newly defined performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The reported FY 2012 average is 22.68.

154 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks and Recreation Department
Facilities Maintenance
Division Description
The Facilities Maintenance Division maintains over 140 buildings, covering approximately 1.5 million square feet,
more than 5,000 streetlights, and supports sports field, court and parking lot lighting for all City facilities. Staff
responds to a variety of maintenance and repair service requests, and performs preventive maintenance. The
division also supports the Engineering Division in construction related activities, implementing small construction
projects such as neighborhood entrance features. The Facilities Division manages several maintenance service
contracts and provides support for City special events. Additionally, the division is responsible for: carpentry,
electrical and plumbing service repairs, and maintenance of street lighting, playgrounds, air conditioning units
and painting services.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments








The implementation of the MainTrac computerized maintenance management work order system
allows for a more streamlined approach to the division’s handling of work orders.
The division completed street light inspections, which facilitated the repair of 920 outages, improving
neighborhood safety.
New roofs were installed at the Holiday Park Social Center and Gym, and at Public Works Administration.
Roof repairs were necessary to prevent leaks during storms.
Neighborhood entrance monuments were installed at Coral Shores and Dolphin Isles. The entrance
monuments serve to beautify the community, as well as identify the community creating a sense of
place.
Landscape lighting on Las Olas (Beach) was replaced to Light-Emitting Diode (LED) lighting. LEDs
advantages over incandescent lighting include lower energy consumption and longer lifetime duration.
Geothermal heating/cooling system was installed at Carter Park and Lauderdale Manors pools. These
systems are an environmentally conscious, energy saving, and efficient heat pump source.
Issued a Request for Proposals to develop a Facilities Master Plan for multi-year maintenance and
upgrades.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives








Neighborhood lighting upgrades for Durrs and North Beach Village will be completed.
Begin the LED lighting conversion program throughout municipal facilities.
Plans are being undertaken to upgrade the air conditioning system at Fire Station No. 2.
Install variable output drives at community pools to reduce electric consumption.
Implement the Facilities’ Needs Assessment.
Installation of new roof at War Memorial Auditorium.
Complete the Environmental and Sustainability Management Systems (ESMS) training at
Virginia Tech to integrate efficiencies and reduce environmental impact of operations and to
prepare staff for ISO 14001 certification.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 155

Parks and Recreation Department
Facilities Maintenance, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Enhance the City’s identify and appearance through well-maintained
green space, parks, major corridors, gateways, and medians (PP 3-2)
-Provide safe, efficient, and well-maintained vehicles, equipment, and
facilities and integrate sustainability into daily operations (IS 12-3)
Department
Objective

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

155

149.68

165

*

85%

86.10%

90%

*

90%

69.14%

85%

19,679

14,169

11,113.70

16,500

Percentage of Kilowatt
hour increase and/or
reduction in comparison
to prior year

-.004%

-.30%

-2.14%

-.03%

Percentage of facilities
audited annually for
potential energy savings

*

*

1.67%

20%

Performance Measures

Average number of work
orders addressed per
employee
Percentage of work orders
Proactively
maintain our parks, addressed in comparison
to requests received
amenities, and
facilities to provide Percentage of completed
a safe and desirable preventative maintenance
place for all patrons tasks
(PP 3-2)
Number of community
service volunteer hours
utilized
Employ sustainable
best practices to
minimize costs and
maximize
equipment life
cycles
(IS 12-3)

*This is a newly defined performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

156 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks and Recreation Department
Marine Facilities
Division Description
Marine Facilities strives to provide excellent marine dockage facilities for vessels of diverse sizes to visiting
and local yachtsmen and boaters. The division provides public access to local waterways, and maintains the
City’s public boat ramps. The division is responsible for dockage facilities, commercial leases, launching
facilities, and capital projects.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments



Facilitated the streamlining and modernization of guest reservation and billing procedures
increasing speed and accuracy.
Received a Florida Inland Navigation District grant to fund the renovation of the 15th Street Boat
Ramp and Marine Complex.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives




The redevelopment of the Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex (FLAC) is being planned. The
development will provide improve the availability of recreational programming.
Dredging of the Las Olas Marina, FLAC and Bahia Mar will begin, improving navigability of our
waterways.
Improvements are being planned for the Las Olas Marina to improve dockage and marine access to
the waterway.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Improve access to and enjoyment of our beach, Riverwalk, waterways,
parks, and open spaces for everyone (PP 3-1)
Department
Objective

Maintain safe and
clean marinas and
public docks
(PP 3-1)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of marinas
maintaining "Clean
Marina" designation

100%

100%

100%

100%

Percentage of marina
surveys overall rated
"good" or "excellent"

95%

90%

100%

95%

Percent occupancy of New
River, Cooley's Landings
and Las Olas Marinas

68%

58%

52.93%

65%

*

*

1,273

1,350

Performance Measures

Number of transient
vessels

*This is a newly defined performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 157

Parks and Recreation Department
Parks
Division Description
The Parks Division performs all mowing operations, irrigation repairs and installations, ball field maintenance,
trash collections and removal, and tree trimming of City-owned properties. In addition to the general
maintenance and upkeep of all parks and medians, the division participates in the set-up of special events when
necessary. Staff is also responsible for the management of cemetery services; removal of seaweed from the
beach and sand from roadways and sidewalks; canal cleaning; and pressure cleaning the Riverwalk and park
gazebos.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments





The division developed the Field Operations Technician (FOT) program to provide well-trained personnel to
expeditiously respond to complaints, hazards, and nuisances. Staff is trained in a wide variety of domains
such as tree trimming, small engine repair, construction, maintenance, irrigation, ballfield maintenance,
painting, and playground safety.
New scoreboards were installed at Croissant, Mills, Osswald, and Sunset Parks to allow participants to
track and monitor the games.
A new walking path was installed at Warfield Park to encourage healthful activity.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives


Bicycle racks will be installed in major multi-modal hubs to support bicycling and promote access to
alternative modes of transportation as well as improved community health.

158 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks and Recreation Department
Parks, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES

Department
Objective

-Enhance the City’s identity and appearance through wellmaintained green space, parks, major corridors, gateways, and
medians (PP 3-2)
-Reduce solid waste disposal and increase recycling (IN 2-4)
-Cultivate our urban forest (PP 3-4)
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Performance Measures
Actual
Actual
Actual
Target
Average number of days
athletic fields available for use

Maximize the
use, aesthetics,
and safety of
parks and
beaches
(PP 3-2)

Increase
recycling
(IN 2-4)
Increase
new tree
plantings
(PP 3-4)

Number of park mowing
cycles completed by staff
Number of median mowing
cycles completed by
contractors
Percentage of playgrounds
inspected
Percentage of patrons who
feel “safe” in parks as
indicated by surveys
Percentage of parks and public
spaces with public recycling
options
Tons of seaweed diverted
from the waste stream and
composted into soil
Number of trees planted in
public places

351

355

322.10

330

36

37

28.50

36

15

17

21.33

15

100%

94.6%

91.67%

100%

*

91.7%

92.5%

95%

*

*

15.91%

60%

932

2,187

1,386.50

2,500

176

632

1,014

800

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 159

Parks and Recreation Department
Recreation Division
Division Description
The Recreation Division strives to enhance the quality of life in Fort Lauderdale by offering a wide variety of high
quality, safe, accessible, and affordable recreational activities and facilities to meet the year round leisure time
needs of neighbors and visitors of all ages and interests. Recreation facilities include City parks, activity centers, and
community pools, as well as the War Memorial Auditorium, and the Aquatic Complex. The division is responsible
for: conducting youth, adult, senior, athletic, teen, and aquatic programs; management of park ranger services,
management of War Memorial Auditorium; providing marina dockage services and managing the Fort Lauderdale
Aquatic Complex; and providing support for community and special events. In addition to the core services, the
division provides aftercare programs, summer camps, adult fitness and wellness programs, and environmental
awareness education.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments








Youth athletics enrolled more than 2,000 children in sport programs and activities, providing youth with
recreational alternatives.
More than 60 youth participated during the first year of the division’s Sailing Program.
Riverside Park partnered with Broward Health to provide fitness opportunities for our neighbors.
Lauderdale Manors installed a walking trail with exercise stations to promote community health.
A partnership with the Orange Bowl Foundation helped to build a new state of the art track and field
complex at Carter Park.
Riverside Park partnered with the Sajai Foundation to provide increased nutrition and fitness instruction to
more than 50 children.
Snyder Park’s Scottish Festival introduced more than 1,500 patrons to Scottish cultural activities.
Community events provide opportunities to build community.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives



The development of baseball fields at Oswald Park will provide additional athletic facilities for the
community.
The installation of a ropes course will be constructed at Snyder Park to provide additional recreation
opportunities. Fitness zones aid in the improvement of community health.

160 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks and Recreation Department
Recreation Division, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Offer a diverse range of youth, adult, and senior recreational programming
(PP 4-1)
- Celebrate our community through special events and sports (PP 4-2)

Department
Objective

Ensure
recreational
programs meet
community
needs
(PP 4-1)

Provide and
support quality
community
events (PP 4-2)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

*

3,068

3,110

Percentage of "good" or
"excellent" overall
recreational program
survey ratings2

87%

94.15%

94.7%

90%

Number of youth camp
participants

*

*

346

360

Number of youth
participating in summer
camp programs3

946

1,539

2,059

1,300

Percentage of available
dates booked at War
Memorial Auditorium

44%

47%

40.27%

42%

Number of volunteer
hours1

14,680

15,788

62,157

45,500

Number of Citysponsored community
events

32

44

65

45

Performance Measures
Number of lesson
program participants

*This is a newly defined performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The reported FY 2012 average is 20,793.99.
2
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County ICMA (ICMA). The reported FY 2012 average is 35% Excellent, 45%
Good for “Overall satisfaction with parks and recreation in the jurisdiction” for jurisdictions with populations between 100,000 and 249,999.
3
This measure is benchmarked by the FBC. The reported FY 2012 average is 1,876.82.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 161

Parks and Recreation Department
Sanitation Services
Division Description
The Sanitation Division provides services to the residents of Fort Lauderdale including: monthly bulk trash
collections, street sweeping, parking lot cleaning, and the collection of garbage and recycling materials from
recycling receptacles located throughout the City’s public spaces. The division is responsible for the removal of
trash and recyclables; cleaning of streets and parking lots; maintaining public places, alleys, and City-owned lots;
and the mitigation of code violations and billing for services rendered. The division also participates in special
event cleanup and is well trained to address all levels of disaster preparation and recovery.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments




The addition of Code Officers to the division has streamlined and improved operations allowing for faster
and more efficient service.
Bulk trash and beach crews worked collaboratively to replace beach sand after Hurricane Sandy.
A new special response team was created to focus on the removal of graffiti in public right-of-ways.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives




The implementation of new co-collection containers in public spaces will allow neighbors to recycle and
discard waste conveniently in one container. Recycling during events will be supported, reducing the
amount of waste in the waste stream.
The division will be examining new sanitation trucks for the removal of trash and recyclables. This will
improve the level of satisfaction with the appearance of City parks and will reduce the amount of waste to
the waste stream.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Enhance the beauty, aesthetics, and environmental quality of neighborhoods
(NE 5-2)

Department
Objective
Enhance the
beauty,
aesthetics, and
environmental
quality of
neighborhoods
(NE 5-2)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of trash code
violation requests requiring
City remediation addressed
within 7 days of notification

*

70%

97.83%

95%

Percentage of alleys and
vacant lots cleaned and
mowed on schedule

*

93%

100%

100%

Performance Measures

*This is a newly defined performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.

162 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Parks & Recreation ‐ General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       42,172,740 $       39,184,864 $       38,816,281 $           (368,583)

Percent 
Difference
‐0.9%

Total Funding

$       42,172,740 $       39,184,864 $       38,816,281 $           (368,583)

‐0.9%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Facilities Maintenance

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         7,915,115 $         7,591,548 $         6,834,856 $           (756,692)

Percent 
Difference
‐10.0%

Marine Facilities

            1,562,593             1,617,675             1,570,566                 (47,109)

‐2.9%

Parks

         15,776,615          14,350,468          13,145,481           (1,204,987)

‐8.4%

Real Estate

               348,529                339,809             1,451,905             1,112,096

327.3%

Recreational Programming

         10,746,742          11,867,789          11,997,165                129,376

1.1%

Special Facilities & Administration

            5,823,146             3,417,575             3,816,308                398,733

11.7%

Total Expenditures

$       42,172,740 $       39,184,864 $       38,816,281 $           (368,583)

‐0.9%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       25,595,835 $       21,799,236 $       21,698,595 $           (100,641)

Operating Expenses

         16,421,926          17,103,218          17,117,686                  14,468

Capital Outlay

               154,979                282,410                         ‐

              (282,410)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$       42,172,740 $       39,184,864 $       38,816,281 $           (368,583)

‐0.9%

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in fleet replacement expenses due to movement of vehicles into Enterprise Funds
   Sanitation Fund
   Increase building repairs & maintenance to support the City Commission's strategic plan to improve 
   accessibility to parks and waterfront, maintenance of medians
   Increase lawn & tree service and horticultural supplies to support the City Commission's strategic plan 
   to keep the City's green space, corridors, and medians well maintained
     Increase in 
Capital Outlay:
   Decrease in expenses due to one‐time costs, such as air conditioner replacement and installation 
   of shade structures
   Decrease in vehicle expenses due to movement of vehicle replacements into Enterprise Funds 

Percent 
Difference
‐0.5%

0.1%

$           (666,132)

               220,000
               500,000

              (267,410)
                (15,000)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 163

Parks and Recreation - Sanitation Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Sanitation Fund‐ 409

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,436,858 $         8,456,996 $       10,635,592 $         2,178,596

Percent 
Difference
25.8%

Total Funding

$         2,436,858 $         8,456,996 $       10,635,592 $         2,178,596

25.8%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Sanitation

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,436,858 $         8,456,996 $       10,635,592 $         2,178,596

Percent 
Difference
25.8%

Total Expenditures

$         2,436,858 $         8,456,996 $       10,635,592 $         2,178,596

25.8%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,707,376 $         4,457,248 $         5,697,379 $         1,240,131

Percent 
Difference
27.8%

Operating Expenses

               729,483             3,999,749             4,027,198                  27,449

0.7%

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

               911,015                911,015

100.0%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$         2,436,858 $         8,456,996 $       10,635,592 $         2,178,596

25.8%

                       ‐

Personal Services:
   Increase due to 17 positions from the Beach Barrier Island Division( General Fund) transferred into
   the Public Places Division and other related salary, wage, and benefits adjustments

$         1,402,848

Operating Expenses:
   Increase due to reorganization of the beach cleaning function from the General Fund; mostly 
   affected are the water & sewer, sanitation, stormwater, and diesel costs

               312,265

   Decrease in fleet overhead costs due to the reorganization of vehicles transferred from the Vehicle
   Rental Fund into the Sanitation Fund
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget includes prior year purchase order encumbrances
Capital Outlay:
   Increase in Fleet vehicle expenditures due to movement of vehicle replacements into Enterprise Funds 

164 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

               266,481
                 18,379
               442,000

Parks and Recreation Department - Cemetery Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Cemetery Fund ‐ 627

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $              (19,492)

Percent 
Difference
‐2.2%

Total Funding

$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $             (19,492)

‐2.2%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Perpetual Care

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $              (19,492)

Percent 
Difference
‐2.2%

Total Expenditures

$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $             (19,492)

‐2.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Operating Expenses
Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $              (19,492)

Percent 
Difference
‐2.2%

$             821,294 $             889,492 $             870,000 $             (19,492)

‐2.2%

Operating Expenses:
   No major variances

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 165

166 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Police Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 682.3

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
Police Chief
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant I
Police Captain
Police Officer
Police Sergeant
Secretary III
Public Safety Grants Manager

OPERATIONS
Police Captain
Accident Investigator II
Crime Analysis Supervisor
Crime Analyst II
Extended Reserves
Mounted Attendant
Police Lieutenant
Police Major
Police Officer
Police Officer (K-9)
Police Sergeant
Police Sergeant (K-9)
Public Safety Aide
Secretary I
PT PSA Red Light Camera

10
4
1
3
6.4
1.5
2
4
266
15
37
1
43
3
4

8

STATE CONFISCATION/
FORFEITURE TRUST
Police Officer
Police Forfeiture Coordinator
Paralegal Assistant

INVESTIGATIONS

SUPPORT SERVICES

POLICE GRANTS
Police Officer

1
1
1
2
2
5
1
1

Police Captain
Accounting Clerk
Background Investigators
Clerk III
Construction Worker II
Construction Worker III
Court Liaison Supervisor
Dept Budget Coordinator
Photographic Technician
Police Aide II
Police Aide III
Police Aide II-Specialist
Police Lieutenant
Police Major
Police Officer
Police Property Supervisor
Police Records Clerk
Police Records Supervisor
Police Sergeant
Range Master
Receptionist
Secretary I
Senior Accounting Clerk
Senior Police Records Clerk
Service Clerk
Storekeeper I

1
2
3
2
1
1
1
1
1.8
4
2
4
3
1
11
1
22
1
3
1
2
1
1
3
5
4

Police Captain
Administrative Aide
Clerk Typist II
Crime Analyst II
Crime Scene Investigator
Latent Fingerprint Examiner
Police Aide III
Police Aide II-Specialist
Police Lieutenant
Police Major
Police Officer
Police Sergeant
Public Safety Aide
Secretary I
Victim Advocate
PT PSA - Report Writing

2
3
5
2
2
2
2
3
3
1
119
17
3
3
2
0.6

FEDERAL CONFISCATION/
FORFEITURES
Police Officer

4

1
1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 167

Police Department
Office of the Chief
Division Description
The Public Information Office, Accreditation Unit, and the Office of Internal Affairs are three main components of
the Chief’s Office. Also contained within the Office of the Chief are the FBI Broward County Corruption Task
Force, the Grants Office, and the Juvenile Civil Citation Program. Additionally, the Office of the Chief is responsible
for the overall management and operation of the three bureaus: Operations, Investigations, and Support Services.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments




The Department underwent the reaccreditation process with the Commission for Florida Law Enforcement
Accreditation during FY 2013 and received our 5th consecutive reaccreditation with Excelsior status,
which is awarded to agencies that have been reaccredited for five cycles (every three years) with no
conditions noted. We are one of only two Departments in the county to receive this recognition.
The Department’s Twitter following, which was started in 2012, has now reached 2,375 followers, nearly
900 over our target.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives


Advance the FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priority: Crime Reduction Strategy and Action Plan.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery (IS 11-3)
Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Maintain the
Department’s
accreditation status
(IS 11-3)

Number of accreditation
standards reviewed (263
possible) to ensure continued
compliance with the standards
mandated by the Commission
for Florida Law Enforcement
Accreditation.

Ensure the timely
release of
information to the
media and the
public (IS 11-3)

Number of ‘followers’
(subscribers) to the Police
Department’s Twitter feed

168 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

263

263

263

263

*

900

2,375

2,615

Police Department
Office of the Chief, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery (IS
11-3)
Department
Objective
Ensure Department
employees conduct
is in accordance
with Department
policy (IS 11-1)

Performance Measures
Number of investigations
conducted into allegations of
employee misconduct

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

139

138

131

< 136

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 169

Police Department
Operations
Division Description
The Operations Bureau is responsible for the 24-hour delivery of uniformed police services throughout the
three police districts within the City for both emergency and non-emergency calls for service. The Operations
Bureau is the largest police bureau comprised of the Patrol Division and the Special Operations Division. The
Patrol Division is made up of uniformed personnel who provide the community with professional police services
around the clock. Responsibilities include proactive crime prevention and responding to calls for service. Patrol
officers address community related problems in a collaborative effort with neighborhoods. Patrol officers
conduct initial criminal investigations, traffic enforcement, accident investigations, and provide School Resource
Officer services. Patrol officers are an integral component of the Intelligence Led Policing initiative that focuses
increased attention on certain repeat offenders. This concept is based on the premise that a smaller number of
repeat offenders are responsible for a disproportionately large number of crimes. When these subjects are not
committing crimes, greater than normal crime reductions can be realized.
The Special Operations Division is responsible for providing support to the entire department through specially
trained and equipped personnel. These units include SWAT (special weapons and tactics), Motors Unit, Mount
Unit, Marine Unit, Traffic Homicide, K-9 Unit, Code Enforcement Unit, Environmental Crimes Unit, Homeless
Outreach, Bomb Team, Dive Team, Bike Team, Crime Prevention Unit and the Red Light Camera Enforcement
Unit. The Special Operations Division is also responsible for developing security plans and staff schedules for
medium and large scale events. These events include but are not limited to: the Fort Lauderdale Air Show,
concerts, St. Patrick’s Day Parade, Memorial Day beach events and the annual New Year’s Eve event.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments










Trained and outfitted Patrol officers and neighbors with the SmartWater forensic system which enables
patrol officers to conduct proactive preliminary investigations of stolen property and prevent crime.
Developed and implemented Major Event Security Plans for first time events: the Grand Opening and
Inaugural City Track & Field Championships at Orange Bowl Field, the Tortuga Music Festival at Fort
Lauderdale Beach and the Fort Lauderdale Air Show to ensure a safe and secure environment and
reduce impact on neighborhoods.
Purchased three new apprehension canines. The canines apprehend hundreds of felons each year that
would not have been located without their keen olfactory senses. K9 teams are routinely called upon to
search buildings, residences as well as entire neighborhoods and can search better than over a dozen
officers.
Creation of the Fort Lauderdale Police Explorer Program involve youth in their community in a positive
way, to reduce juvenile crime, and help develop potential future law enforcement professionals.
Homeless outreach officers, in conjunction with the Task Force for Ending Homeless, had 17,855
contacts and placed 12,585 individuals in long term program beds/emergency overnight shelter. They
also reunited 140 homeless individuals with families.
Officers responded to emergencies within 5 minutes ninety percent of the time, crucial for victim
protection, culprit apprehension, and evidence retention.
The Red Light Camera program expanded to twenty-nine cameras in 2013; enhancing the safety of
drivers throughout the City. The increased cameras provide around the clock enforcement of red light
violations and also play a vital role in recording video evidence of crimes that occur nearby.

170 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Police Department
Operations, continued
FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives






In January of 2014 six Captains and two Majors will transition out of the division as nine Lieutenants are
transition into the division. The reorganization will help the department to better develop its command
staff and reduce the number of middle managers.
Two new substations will facilitate police citizen contacts and also have a crime deterrent effect in the
neighborhoods they occupy, including one in Police District 1 – at the Coral Ridge Country Club and in
Police District 2 - on Sistrunk Boulevard.
Critical incident vehicles will be replaced, including Two SWAT trucks and one Bomb Truck. Their use
includes hostage rescue, explosives recovery, suspicious packages, barricaded suspects and search
warrants are all managed from these specialized vehicles. They also store equipment such as ballistic
shields and blankets, SWAT robots, Bomb robot chemical agents and pole cameras.
In support of improving bicyclist safety, training and outreach will be provided to neighbors.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Reduce and solve crime in all neighborhoods (PS 9-1)
-Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response (PS 9-2)
Department
Objective

Maintain a
crime
reduction
strategy
(PS 9-1)

Ensure
effective
response
(PS 9-2)

Performance Measures
Number of Crime prevention
surveys completed
Uniform Crime Report (UCR)
Part 1 Crimes reported per
1,000 residents1 (calendar year)
Uniform Crime Report (UCR)
Part 1 Crimes reported per 1,000 of
the average daily population
(254,000)1 (calendar year)
Percentage of code three (high
priority) calls with a response time
of under five minutes
Average time for non-emergency
calls from call received until
dispatched

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

*

36

55

70.7

68.2

N/A

46

45

N/A

88%

92%

89.13%

92%

16 min
52 sec

17 min
31 sec

19 min
10 sec

18 min
30 sec

1

68

1

45

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Reliable data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Uniform Crime Reports are calculated using calendar year, this data is not yet complete.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 171

Police Department
Operations, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Improve pedestrian, bicyclist, and vehicular safety (IN 1-3)
-Provide quick and exceptional fire, medical, and emergency response (PS 9-2)
Department
Objective
Maintain safe
thoroughfares
for vehicles,
cyclists, and
pedestrians
(IN 1-3)

Performance Measures
Percentage of STEP (Strategic
Traffic Enforcement Plan)
locations monitored monthly
Number of vehicle accidents
involving pedestrians
Number of vehicle accidents
involving bicyclists
Number of SWAT call-outs

Provide
specialized police
department
responses for
high risk
incidents
(PS 9-2)

Percentage of calls requiring
the K-9 unit that result in an
apprehensions
Number of Bomb Squad
deployments

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

*

70%

80%

80%

138

164

N/A1

<164

82

152

N/A1

<152

50

33

43

35

10.5%

10.5%

12.3%

12.5%

9

8

15

10

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Reliable data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Vehicle accident data is reported to the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles (DHSMV) on a calendar year basis
and not a fiscal year.

172 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Police Department
Support Services
Division Description
Support Services is responsible for numerous administrative functions, including budget and finance,
personnel, supply, fleet, records, court liaison, training, facility maintenance, evidence, and recruiting. In
addition to the above, the Bureau continuously seeks to improve efficiencies department wide.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments






Acquired and outfitted two additional “Peacemaker” armored surveillance platforms. The
Peacemakers video records activity in areas identified as crime “hot spots.”
Implemented an automated system to track vehicle assignments utilizing biometric technology. This
system eliminates the need for an employee to manually assign vehicles on a daily basis and also
allows for easy tracking.
Successfully implemented a new evidence tracking system which will increase efficiency by tracking
the movement of all evidence electronically with a complete audit trail.
Replaced the antiquated fire alarm system throughout Police Headquarters, meeting safety
requirements and accreditation standards.
Replaced a portion of the HVAC (air conditioning) system in the firing range to temporarily improve
air quality.

FY 2013 Major Projects & Initiatives







Replacing 77 aging marked police vehicles that exceed replacement schedules.
Replacing an aging automated vehicle locating (AVL) system, to allowing supervisors access to vehicle
locations in the field and providing reports related to officer activity.
Adding digital information sharing capabilities to motor and marine officers to include AVL to allow
identify motorcycles and vessel location on a constant basis. Additionally, officers will have the
ability to utilize various computer applications.
Replacing antiquated mobile computers used by police service aides, currently unable to receive and
transmit information.
Adding electronic crash and ticketing capability to police service aides and motor officers. This initial
limited roll-out will increase efficiency in the field and lead to paperless traffic crash reports.
Revamping the Citizen Police Academy model, bringing the program to the community instead of
bringing the community to police headquarters to increase participation through a larger venue and
easing the present background criteria for participants.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 173

Police Department
Support Services, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)
-Involve our neighbors with prevention efforts and emergency
preparedness (PS 10-2)
-Provide reliable and progressive technology infrastructure (IS 11-4)
Department
Objective

Ensure staff is trained
and prepared to
deliver critical police
functions to the
neighbors and visitors
(IS 11-1)

Increase community
awareness and
partnerships related
to public safety (PS
10-2)

Improve the ability of
uniformed personnel
to access law
enforcement related
information in the
field (IS 11-4)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Percentage of employees
receiving minimum mandatory
training according to Florida
Department of Law Enforcement
mandates and accreditation
standards

100%

100%

100%

100%

Percentage of specialty units
trained during their scheduled
annual cycle

100%

100%

100%

100%

Percentage of employee
development training requests
approved

*

*

87%

80%

Performance Measures

Number of neighbors that register
and begin attending the Citizens
Police Academy
Percentage of graduates providing
a favorable critique of the Citizens
Police Academy
Percentage of applicants
completing the Citizens Police
Academy

21

22

22

30

100%

100%

100%

100%

62%

86%

80%

90%

Percentage of all marked Police
Department vehicles, motorcycles
and vessels with the ability to
receive and transmit digital data

72%

81%

95%

Percentage of vehicles equipped
with electronic traffic citation and
accident form technology

*

*

0%

Percentage of vehicles equipped
1
with field reporting capability

*

*

0%

2

100%

2

30%

2

20%

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The Information Technology Services Department is working with vendors to create the infrastructure to enable this
project to move forward. Once the infrastructure is created and tested, field reporting will be rolled-out in an incremental
basis.
2
These items are on hold, awaiting final disposition of regionalized communications.

174 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Police Department
Investigations
Division Description
The Investigations Bureau is comprised of the Special Investigations Division (SID), and the Criminal
Investigations Division (CID). Special Investigations is responsible for addressing and reducing emerging Part I
Crime trends through the efficient management of our proactive resources, which includes Strategic
Investigations, Upper Level Narcotics Investigations, and Vice Units. Criminal Investigations is responsible for
follow-up investigations relating to homicides, violent crimes, economic crimes, burglary, larcenies, offender
monitoring, and fugitive apprehension.
The various units within each division are tasked with both covert and follow-up investigations into all manner
of criminal activity, including narcotics violations, threats to homeland security, and Part I Crimes. In addition,
specific units provide support to the entire Department in the form of technology used to gather, process,
document and preserve evidence.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments










CID introduced SmartWater CSI, a forensic coding theft deterrent. The product is a forensically
coded, robust and non-hazardous liquid that is applied to property for later identification in the
event of theft. The pilot program was rolled out in the South Middle River neighborhood for testing
purposes.
CID assigned a Fraud Unit Detective to the Broward County Property Appraiser’s Office. This has
resulted in more than $15.5 million dollars in property value being restored to the City tax rolls, and
over $1.2 million dollars in back taxes being assessed.
CID acquired a magnification tool that incorporates a forensic light source which is used to identify
trace evidence not visible to the naked eye. This alternative light source is capable of emitting
wavelengths of light (visible and invisible) to detect evidence that would have previously been lost.
CID has closed the Paul Coverdell Grant (FY 2011) which resulted in the following outcomes: 1 new
Latent Examiner hired, training for latent examiners and fingerprint analysts, acquisition of new
hardware and software to operate MorphoTrack Review Stations, acquisition of a new AFIS system,
and significant reduction in the latent backlog that led to the entry of 5,703 latent prints and
identification over 500 suspected criminals.
SID updated all covert video and audio capabilities from analog to digital, enhancing evidence quality.
SID utilized grant funding to purchase $20,000 worth of digital surveillance equipment.
Utilized two grants, Underage Alcohol & Tobacco and Trend Busters, to successfully curb the
frequency of underage alcohol sales to minors throughout the City.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives





Upgrading the current line-of-sight antenna-based camera system to an Internet-based system,
widening the range of use and allowing an increased number of cameras to be deployed at any given
time.
CID seeks to acquire a license plate recognition tool, National Vehicle Location Service (NVLS), which
consists of over 1.4 billion plate scans that has the capability of providing instant notification to
detectives on the location of a specified vehicle. This real time data will be integral not only in solving
investigations but in removing subjects from the street before they can commit other crimes.
Investigating the creation of an “Alcohol Compliance Officer” position to coordinate with the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms on the monitoring, regulation and enforcement of after-hours alcohol
violations.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 175

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Reduce and solve crime in all neighborhoods (PS 9-1)

Department
Objective

Develop planned
responses to Part
I crime trends
(PS 9.1)

CY 2011
Actual

CY 2012
Actual

CY 2013
Actual

CY 2014
Target

*

1,350

1,300

1,300

335

297

382

320

18,701

18,595

13,937

18,968

Number of Property Crimes
cases assigned per detective1

711

739

437

746

Percent of Property Crimes
investigations cleared by the
Criminal Investigations
Division (CID) detectives (nonPatrol)

4.1%

4.8%

4.9%

5.1%

Number of Persons Crimes
cases assigned per detective2

165

156

185

160

Percent of Persons Crimes
investigations cleared by the
Criminal Investigations
Division (CID) detectives (nonPatrol)

12.3%

11.4%

11.6%

11.4%

Performance Measures

Properties presented to the
Nuisance Abatement
Detective for evaluation

Number of crime tips received
and assigned for follow-up via
the Special Investigations
Division (SID) tip line
Number of follow-up
investigations assigned

Identify, address
and successfully
prosecute those
responsible for
felony Part I
crimes through
investigative
follow up (PS 9.1)

NOTE: All figures are based on Calendar Year (CY) and not Fiscal Year (FY) data collection to be consistent with the
annual Uniform Crime Report (UCR). Data provided for CY 2013 is reflective of the year-to-date information available
for January through September 2013.
*This is a newly identified performance measure. Reliable data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Property Crimes include Burglaries, Auto Thefts, Larcenies, and Frauds.
2
Person Crimes include Homicides, Robberies, Aggravated Assaults, Aggravated Batteries, Sexual Assaults, Felony
Batteries, Kidnapping, and Abuse & Neglect. Previously reported numbers included missing persons.

176 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Police - General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       98,116,199 $       92,894,424 $       93,989,773 $          1,095,349

Percent 
Difference
1.2%

Total Funding

$       98,116,199 $       92,894,424 $       93,989,773 $          1,095,349

1.2%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Office of The Chief

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$          2,073,357 $          3,240,680 $          2,190,819 $        (1,049,861)

Percent 
Difference
‐32.4%

Operations

          53,395,274           47,663,242           50,756,461             3,093,219

6.5%

Support Services

          20,181,816           21,027,055           20,474,577               (552,478)

‐2.6%

Investigations

          22,465,752           20,963,446           20,567,916               (395,530)

‐1.9%

Total Expenditures

$       98,116,199 $       92,894,424 $       93,989,773 $          1,095,349

1.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       82,383,717 $       74,026,936 $       75,482,946 $          1,456,010

Percent 
Difference
2.0%

Other Operating Expenses

          15,696,693           18,325,591           17,506,827               (818,764)

‐4.5%

Capital Outlay

                  35,789                541,897             1,000,000                458,103

84.5%

Total Expenditures

$       98,116,199 $       92,894,424 $       93,989,773 $          1,095,349

1.2%

FY 2014 Major Differences (+/‐5)
Personal Services:
     Increase in workers compensation charges due to a one time premium reduction in FY2013
     Increase in salaries & wages for 12 Recovery Grant Police Officers transferred from Grants
     Decrease in Police and Firefighters' Retirement System Pension related annual contribution

$          1,175,898
                851,918
              (118,861)

Operating Expenses:
    Decrease in cost for E911 Dispatch payment to Broward County 
    Increase in other professional services due to an increase in red light camera enforcement
    Increase in fleet related expenses as the result of a one time reduction in charges in FY2013
    Increase in Police Professional Liability Insurance due to a one time premium reduction in FY2013
    Increase in office equipment for the replacement of 260 laptops that are 7 years or older in FY2014
    Increase in cost for criminal investigation law enforcement transcription related clerical services

           (5,647,438)
             1,031,156
             1,561,461
                967,901
                700,000
                180,000

Capital Outlay:
   Funding for Citywide Public Camera Safety Program
   Decrease in funds for one time computer equipment and software charges in FY 2013

             1,000,000
              (525,327)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 177

Police Department - Police Confiscation Funds
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Police Confiscation Operations ‐ 104

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             583,501 $             571,562 $             805,139 $             233,577

Percent 
Difference
40.9%

Justice Task Force ‐ 107

               747,869             1,272,753             1,889,938                617,185

48.5%

Total Funding

$         1,331,370 $         1,844,314 $         2,695,077 $             850,763

46.1%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Confiscation/Forfeiture Trust

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             583,501 $             571,562 $             805,139 $             233,577

Percent 
Difference
40.9%

Federal Confiscation/Forfeitures

               747,869             1,272,753             1,889,938                617,185

48.5%

Total Expenditures

$         1,331,370 $         1,844,314 $         2,695,077 $             850,763

46.1%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             795,175 $             860,395 $             827,263 $              (33,132)

Percent 
Difference
‐3.9%

Operating Expenses

               468,343                539,447                517,814                 (21,633)

‐4.0%

Capital Outlay

                 67,852                444,473             1,350,000                905,528

203.7%

Total Expenditures
 

$         1,331,370 $         1,844,314 $         2,695,077 $             850,763

46.1%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Capital Outlay:
    Increase  in funding for transitional costs related to E911 Dispatch moving to county
 
 

178 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

$          1,050,000

 

 

Police Department - School Crossing Guard Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

School Crossing Guard ‐ 146

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$                          ‐ $            800,000 $            800,000 $                          ‐

Total Funding

$                     ‐

$            800,000 $            800,000 $                     ‐

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

0.0%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

School Crossing Guards

FY 2012
Actual
$                     ‐

FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            800,000 $            800,000 $                     ‐

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

Total Expenditures

$                     ‐

$            800,000 $            800,000 $                     ‐

0.0%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures
FY 2012
Actual
$                     ‐

FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$            800,000 $            800,000 $                     ‐

Percent 
Difference
0.0%

Total Expenditures
$                     ‐
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$            800,000 $            800,000 $                     ‐

0.0%

Operating Expenses

Operating Expenses:
   No Variances

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 179

180 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 181

Public Works Department
Organizational Chart
TOTAL FTE's ‐ 413

CUSTOMER SERVICE
Financial Administrator
Business Manager
Meter Reader Coordinator
Administrative Aide
Clerk I
Clerk II
Clerk III
Meter Reader/Serviceworker
Public Information Specialist
Secretary I
Secretary II
Service Clerk
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Assistant II
Storekeeper II
Storekeeper III

ADMINISTRATION
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
5
1
1
1
7
1
3
1
1

UTILITIES ENGINEERING 
OPERATIONS
Assistant City Engineer
Senior Project Manager
City Surveyor
Engineering Aide I
Engineering Aide II
Administrative Aide
Survey/CADD Coordinator
Engineering Inspection Supervisor
Engineering Inspector II
Party Chief
Engineering Technician II
Project Engineer
Project Manager I
Project Manager II
Administrative Assistant II
Engineer Records Technician
 

1
1
1
3
5
1
1
2
4
3
2
5
1
1
1
1
 

 

 

FLEET SERVICES
Senior Auto & Equipment Engineer
Administrative Aide

182 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

1
2

Assis. Public Works Director
Accounting Clerk
Administrative Assistant II
Administrative Assistant I
Senior Accounting Clerk
Clerk III

1
1
1
1
1
2

SANITATION
Asst. Public Works Director
Administrative Assistant II
Administrative Assistant I
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Municipal Maintenance Worker III
Municipal Maintenance Worker IV 
Recycling Program Coordinator
Service Clerk

1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES
WATER & SEWER:
Sustainability Manager
Environmental Inspector
Environmental Program Coordinator
Parks Supervisor
Senior Management Fellow
Administrative Assistant I

1
3
1
1
1
1

STORMWATER:
Environmental Services Manager
Environmental Inspector
Environmental Resources Supervisor
Planner III
Principal Planner
Project Engineer

1
1
1
1
1
1

ENGINEERING SERVICES

TREATMENT

Public Works Director
Deputy Director
Assistant City Engineer
Secretary II
Engineer
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant I
Airport Engineer
Project Engineer
Engineering Inspector I
Engineering Inspector II
Engineering Technician II
Project Manager
Senior Project Manager
Senior Accounting Clerk
Word Processing Secretary
Administrative Assistant II
Project Manager II
Project Manager
Senior Project Manager

1
1
1
1
2
2
3
1
5
2
3
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
2

WATER & SEWER:
Water & W/W Treatment Manager
Public Service Maintenance Chief
Reg Water Facilities Manager
Diesel Technician
Electro Technician
Environmental Chemist
Environmental Lab Supervisor
Environmental Lab Technician
Industrial Electrician
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Municipal Maintenance Worker III
Painter (Maintenance)
Process Control Engineer
Reg Chief Water Operator
Service Clerk
Utilities Mechanic I
Utilities Mechanic II
Water Treatment Plant Operator Trainee
Water Treatment Plant Operator I

1
1
1
1
3
1
1
6
1
4
4
1
2
2
1
3
5
2
7

Administrative Assistant II
Project Manager II

1
1

Water Treatment Plant Operator II

10

CENTRAL REGIONAL:
Public Service Maintenance Chief
Reg Chief Wastewater Operator
Reg W/W Facilities Manager
Electro Technician
Electronics/Instrument Technician
Industrial Electrician
Municipal Maintenance Worker I
Municipal Maintenance Worker III (Pub Svces)
Painter (Maintenance)
Reg W/W Plant Operator II
Utilities Mechanic I
Utilities Mechanic II
Water Treatment Plant Operator Trainee
W/W Treatment Plant Operator I

1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
7
5
3
1
8

STORMWATER:
Environmental Lab Technician

1

DISTRIBUTION & COLLECTION
WATER & SEWER:
Utilities Distribution & Collection Sys. Mgr
Distribution & Collection Chief
Public Service Maintenance Chief
Distribution & Collection Supervisor
Administrative Aide
Air Conditioning Technician
Construction Worker III
Diesel Technician
Electro Technician
Fabricator-Welder
Heavy Equipment Operator
Industrial Electrician
Industrial Electrician II
Machinist
Process Control Engineer
Utilities Mechanic I
Utilities Mechanic II

1
6
3
2
1
1
2
3
2
2
4
3
2
1
1
13
13

Utilities Serviceworker
Utilities Serviceworker III
Utilities Serviceworker IV
Utility Field Representative
Project Manager II

50
22
22
8
1

STORMWATER:
Distribution & Collection Chief
Utilities Serviceworker
Utilities Serviceworker III
Utilities Serviceworker IV
Field Operations Technician (III)
Municipal Maintenance Worker II

1
10
5
3
1
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 183

Public Works Department
Administration and Customer Service
The Administration Division provides management oversight of Public Works, leading the department and
monitoring its current and long range goals and objectives. The Division provides for financial, budgeting,
payroll/personnel, grant management and administrative support to the department. Additionally,
exemplary customer service and neighbor support is provided via the 24-hour Customer Service Center.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments

 Created the Division of Sustainability providing a dedicated effort to identify and implement costsaving and quality of life enhancing green initiatives citywide.
 Water and sewer rates were maintained at levels amongst the lowest in Broward County,
minimizing the financial impact to our neighbors for vital services.
 Increased training hours provided to City staff by over 40%, providing over 3,500 hours of training.
 Conducted an industry-standard Project Management training for staff focused on delivering
projects to meet the high expectations of stakeholders.
 Developed excellence standards policies and procedures manual for engineering operations.
 Updated and strengthened the Emergency Response Plan to ensure a safe, comprehensive, and
timely response to a storm event or disaster.
 Responded to over 82,000 requests for service in the 24-hour Customer Service Center and via the
web, providing superior customer service to our neighbors.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives

 Advance the following FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priorities: the Stormwater
Management Plan, Beach Renourishment Plan and Funding, Engineering Project Management, a
Bridges Master Plan, a Sidewalk Program, and Street Resurfacing.
 Develop a quality control/quality assurance program that will provide for enhanced accountability
for scheduling, cost estimating, and capital project delivery.
 Work with the Water Resource Task Force to identify a viable alternative water source to address
the region’s long term water supply needs.
 Improve accuracy of capital chargebacks to offset staff operating costs and reduce dependency on
the general fund budget.
 Initiate the application process to become accredited by American Public Works Association, to
formally verify and recognize public works agencies for compliance with recommended agency
practices.
 Expand use of the City’s webpage to provide neighbors with timely and accurate information on
Public Works initiatives.
 Develop technical training courses for professional staff to reinforce and standardize best
management practices.
 Strengthen and increase safety and training programs to promote proactive initiatives to reduce
injury and costly risk claims.
 Implement changes to the 24-hour Customer Service Center software application to improve call
center performance and reporting, while providing superior customer service to our neighbors.

184 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Public Works Department
Administration and Customer Service, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Foster professional and rewarding careers (IS 11-1)
-Improve employee safety and wellness (IS 11-2)
-Continuously improve and innovate communication and service delivery (IS
11-3)
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)
Department
Objective
Increase
employee
recognition
and
development
(IS 1-1)
Improve
employee
safety and
wellness
(IS 1-2)
Control costs
for vital
service
(IS 2-1)
Expand and
enhance
customer
service
(IS 1-3)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Training hours provided per
budgeted Public Works
Department position 1

5.61

1.03

6.6

7.50

Number of new on the job
injuries

79

58

43

55

Monthly residential water cost
using 7,500 gallons2

$19.56

$24.47

$26.12

$27.42

Number of neighbor calls to 24Customer Service Center per FTE

8,672

13,003

9,524

11,650

Number of meter reading field
investigations completed per
FTE

7,539

11,932

7,878.8

7,000

Performance Measures

1

This measure is benchmarked by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).The reported FY 2011 average is 19.0.
This measure is benchmarked by the AWWA. The reported FY 2011 average is $25.96. By City Ordinance, the City’s water rates increase
5% annually.
2

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 185

Public Works Department
Design and Construction
Division Description
The Engineering and Architecture Division provides engineering, architectural, and project management
for capital community investment and public right-of-way projects. The division ensures that projects are
in compliance with approved plans, specifications, and applicable building codes, and meet high standards
in quality, time, and cost. Additionally, the division provides engineering and project management services
for water, sewer, and stormwater capital improvement projects.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments





Completed construction of Fire Station 35 at 1969 E Commercial Boulevard enhancing the fire
rescue facilities to the northeast quadrant of City.
Completed the $15 million Sistrunk Boulevard Streetscape improvement project to improve
infrastructure and beautify the Sistrunk Boulevard corridor.
Completed construction of the Hortt Park and Community Center enhancing the quality of life for
the surrounding community.
Completed construction of the Orange Bowl at Carter Park project, a joint venture between the
Orange Bowl Committee and the City of Fort Lauderdale. Project amenities include special turf
surface combined football/soccer field with adjoining running track. The special surface allows for
extended field utilization and reduced maintenance costs.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives









Develop a multi-year Bridge Master Plan to address aging City bridges in a proactive manner.
Complete the renovation of the Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Center in coordination with the
International Swimming Hall of Fame.
Complete historic reconstruction of Southside School in District IV.
Develop a citywide Pavement Assessment Management Program that will be used to prioritize,
budget and schedule asphalt paving projects in FY 2014
Complete improvements to the 15th Street Boat Launch and Marine Complex, providing for new
floating docks, ADA improvements, upgraded landscaping, and expanded parking and fencing.
Complete construction of Fire Station 13 at 2871 E Sunrise Boulevard on the Birch State Park
property.
Implement project management training and software to design and construct projects that come
in under budget and on-time.
Develop a Sidewalk Management System Inspection & Assessment that will be used as the basis
for a comprehensive citywide sidewalk installation and repair program.

186 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Public Works Department
Design and Construction, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Integrate transportation land use and planning to create a walkable and
bikeable community (IN 1-2)
-Proactively maintain our water, wastewater, road and bridge
infrastructure (IN 2-1)
Department
Performance
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Objective
Measures
Actual
Actual
Actual
Target
Rehabilitate
our aging
infrastructure
(IN 2-1)

Increase ADA
accessibility
(IN 1-2)

Linear feet of re-lined
sewer main
Linear feet of small
water main
constructed
Number of ADA
sidewalk ramps
constructed
Percentage of Sun
Trolley stops that are
ADA compliant

*

22,7361

22,000

20,000

21,9251

21,0001

15,869

20,000

13

15

80

85

32%

32%

34%

40%

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Construction during 2012 was accelerated under the WaterWorks 2011 program.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 187

Public Works Department
Environmental Services
Division Description
Environmental Services is charged with protecting the City’s water, wastewater and stormwater
infrastructure and protecting the natural environment. This is accomplished by taking an active role in
water supply and protection, wastewater pretreatment and discharges, flooding, water quality and
protecting and preserving our natural resources like the beach and our waterways. The division provides
consultation to other City departments and coordinates City regulatory affairs such as permits,
environmental enforcement actions, reporting requirements with all regulatory agencies as well as
implementing mandated Federal and State programs such as Cross-connection, Industrial Pretreatment,
and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The division is also engaged in
educational and outreach opportunities to promote the importance of and the sustainable use of our
natural resources.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments

 Developed a Technical Advisory Group to provide short, mid, and long term alternatives to
stormwater management. Flooding concerns were identified as a community priority in the 2012
Neighbor Survey.
 Completed River Oaks Preserve Phase I construction reestablishing an open channel and
alleviating flooding to the immediate neighbors.
 Installed a Pollution Control System to improve drainage and control pollution to New River.
 Amended the Sewer Use Ordinance to comply with National and State mandates for industrial
pre-treatment and increasing the fine structure to current inflationary rates.
 Completed Community Rating System Re-modification. City lowered its score to a “6” which
results in a citywide discount on flood insurance premiums.
 Completed the A1A beach fill project.


FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives

 Adopt a Florida Friendly Landscape Ordinance to address the permit requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
 Initiate a holistic dredging program to address canal dredging citywide.
 Implement a Bacteriological Control Plan to address NPDES requirement.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Improve air and water quality and our natural environment (IN 2-5)

Department
Objective

Performance
Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Enhance the
environment
and mitigate
the effects of
environmental
degradation
(IN 2-5)

Surface water quality
compliance

96%

96%

96%

96%

188 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Public Works Department
Sustainability
Division Description
The Sustainability Division is charged with the implementation of the citywide Sustainability Action Plan
along with optimizing efficiency within City operations. In addition, the division promotes a cultural shift
toward sustainable decision making and integrating these factors into the budget process and procurement
practices. The division’s solid waste section provides for an enhanced level of sanitation services including
bi-weekly garbage collection, weekly green waste collection, and weekly curbside recycling. Fleet Services is
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and effective replacement of the City’s fleet vehicles and
equipment. They also manage the City’s fuel operations; gasoline and diesel fuel inventories (including
emergency use); and the operation of the five fueling sites.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments









Implemented Mix it Curb it, a Single Stream Recycling Program that increased recycling tonnage by
40%.
Completed the Smart Watts program that awarded $236,400 in rebates for retrofitting fixtures to
energy efficient products.
Implemented Conservation Pays program which encouraged water conservation and distributed
rebates to 450 households for high efficiency toilet installations.
The City was ranked in the top 20 by the 100 Best Fleets of North America for the past six years, for
demonstrating success in 16 categories, including accountability, technology improvements,
creativity, and competitive pricing, providing the City with national recognition.
Obtained the Crystal Award by Fleet Counselors, based on an audit of program compliance in 20
competencies.
Awarded the GalaVerde Award for “Most Outstanding Green Government” from the South Florida
Chapter of the United States Green Building Council (USGBC).
Received unanimous recommendation from the Council of Fort Lauderdale Civic Associations to
proceed forward with the Adaptation Action Areas (AAA) initiative to draft comprehensive plan
policy language for the future implementation of AAAs as well as the development of a guidance
document to assist Florida communities that choose to address AAAs in their local comprehensive
plan.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Obtain Florida Green Building Certification, to become a leader in local government sustainability.
Adopt an Energy Disclosure Ordinance to target large energy users for education and incentive.
Implement a Fleet Repurposing replacement strategy to ensure City fleet provides for right
purpose/right size vehicle.
Increase recycling efforts for commercial and multifamily properties utilizing a Broward County
Resource and Recovery Board grant that will provide educational outreach and offer rebates.
Through a grant partnership with the State and South Florida Regional Planning Council, develop a
guide for coastal communities to identify and address sea level rise.
Complete the Environmental and Sustainability Management Systems (ESMS) training at Virginia
Tech to integrate efficiencies and reduce environmental impact of operations and to prepare staff
for ISO 14001 certification

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 189

Public Works Department
Sustainability, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Reduce solid waste disposal and increase recycling (IN 2-4)
-Improve air and water quality and our natural environment
(IN 2-5)
-Provide safe, efficient and well-maintained vehicles,
equipment and facilities and integrate sustainability into
daily operations (IS 2-3)
Department
Objective

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Increase
participation in
the city’s
Green Waste
separation
program
(IN 2-4)

Household refuse collected
(tons)

42,088

42,174

40,671

38,772

Yard waste materials
diverted from disposal (tons)

15,382

16,190

12,753

16,000

Recycling materials diverted
from disposal (tons)

7,800

9,107

11,688

13,000

Enhance the
environment
and mitigate
the effects of
environmental
degradation
(IN 2-5)

Number of environmental
outreach program activities
and events held

17

24

23

24

Percentage of citywide tree
canopy coverage on public
and private property

*

20.6%

21.3%

21.5%

Percent change in total fleet
fuel consumption (as
compared to same period
prior year)

*

*

-2.39%

-1.75%

97.1%

97.2%

96.7%

95.5%

*

*

73.6%1

85%

Increase fleet
operational
efficiencies and Percentage of fleet available
effectiveness for use
(IS 2-3)
Percentage of preventative
maintenance completed ontime

*This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Previous years did not include all vehicle classes. The FY 2013 figure is based on a new methodology that is inclusive of all
vehicle classes.

190 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Public Works Department
Utilities: Water, Wastewater and Stormwater
Division Description
The Public Works Utilities Operations consists of the Distribution and Collection Division responsible for
the operation, maintenance, repair, and improvement of the water distribution and the wastewater and
stormwater collection systems. The Treatment Division provides our neighbors with safe and efficient
water treatment, water production, and wastewater treatment and disposal. Additionally, the division’s
National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Certification (NELAC) certified environmental laboratory
provides sampling and testing services to the City and its large users, 365 days a year.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments

 Received the Florida Section of the American Water Works Association Distribution System of the
Year Award, providing State and National recognition to the City.
 Improve water quality by rehabilitating two filters at the Fiveash Water Treatment Plant and
restored the production capacity for the two filters.
 Increased stormdrain maintenance to twice annually, minimizing flooding potential to our
neighbors.
 Replaced three sludge feedwell mixers at George T. Lohmeyer Regional Wastewater Treatment
Plant which restores and improves the treatment capacity at the wastewater plant.
 Achieved National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program certification of the City’s
Environmental Laboratory. Certification permits the City to continue performing over 35,000 annual
samples and over 100,000 laboratory tests for water, wastewater, and stormwater.
 Received the Florida Water Environment Association (FWEA) Wastewater Collection System of the
Year Award.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives

 Provide operational support for replacement of two inch and four inch water mains to improve the
fire protection, water quality, and Insurance Services Organization (ISO) rating.
 Rehabilitate reactor 1A basin at the George T. Lohmeyer Regional Wastewater Plant to restore and
improve treatment capacity at the wastewater plant.
 Evaluate the current Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system and provide
recommendations to address overall SCADA needs of the treatment and conveyance/distribution
system.
 Implement measureable sustainable initiatives within Utilities.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 191

Public Works Department
Utilities: Water, Wastewater and Stormwater, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Proactively maintain our water, wastewater, road and bridge infrastructure
(IN 2-1)
Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Increase
preventative
maintenance
to water and
sewer
infrastructure
(IN 2-1)

Percentage of gravity
sewer lines cleaned (linear
feet)
Percentage of storm
drains inspected and/or
cleaned twice annually
Number of water line
breaks (all inclusive)1

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

51%

50%

48%

47%

10%

75%

120%

100%

718

541

863

820

1

Data has been adjusted to reflect the methodology used by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Proactively maintain our water, wastewater, road and bridge infrastructure
(IN 2-1)

Department
Objective

Operate and
maintain the
regional
water and
wastewater
treatment
plants
(IN 2-1)

1

Performance Measures
Raw water treated in
million gallons of water
per day (MGD) per FTE1
Wastewater treated in
million gallons per day
(MGD)
Required regulatory
laboratory tests
performed2
Percentage of days in
compliance with primary
drinking water standards3

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

.92

.91

.87

.95

35.3

39.0

39.25

40.0

108,141

102,000

103,427

102,000

100%

100%

100%

100%

This measure is benchmarked by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). The reported FY 2011 average is .27.
The number of required samples was reduced for raw water wells and well field remediation. Lead and copper sampling is on
three year cycle, due in FY 2014.
3
This measure is benchmarked by the AWWA. The reported FY 2011 average is 100%.
2

192 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Public Works Department - General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         7,532,690 $         5,814,337 $         5,029,212 $           (785,125)

Percent 
Difference
‐13.5%

Total Funding

$         7,532,690 $         5,814,337 $         5,029,212 $           (785,125)

‐13.5%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Community Appearance

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$               10,350 $               12,600 $                          ‐ $             (12,600)

Percent 
Difference
‐100.0%

Engineering Services

           7,522,340            5,801,737            5,029,212              (772,524)

‐13.3%

Total Expenditures

$         7,532,690 $         5,814,337 $         5,029,212 $           (785,125)

‐13.5%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         7,008,520 $         5,416,043 $         4,656,758 $           (759,286)

Percent 
Difference
‐14.0%

Operating Expenses

               524,170                391,368                372,455                 (18,914)

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

                  (6,925)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures

$         7,532,690 $         5,814,337 $         5,029,212 $           (785,125)

‐13.5%

                   6,925                        ‐

‐4.8%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Personal Services:
    Decrease in personal services due to the transfer of three Right of Way positions that were moved to
    the Department of Sustainable Development's Urban Design & Development Division
    Decrease in personal services due to the transfer of fourteen Survey related postions to the 
    Water & Sewer Fund
    Increase due to the transfer of the Airport Engineer and a Transportation Engineer to the General Fund
    Increase in personal services to add a new Quality Assurance/Quality Control Internal Audit Team 
    Increase in personal services to add a new Transportation Project Manager for transportation projects
    Decrease in personal services due to the outsourcing of architecural services
    Increase in personal services due to other term pay

$           (381,066)
          (1,095,256)
               250,801
               362,442
                 89,053
             (417,135)
               202,048

Operating Expenses:
     Reduction in expense due to the transfer of the Community Appearance Division to the Department 
     of Sustainable Development
     Increase in operating expenses for railway signal maintenance, licenses, and land lease expenses for
     Florida East Coast Railwal CSX Corporation
     Reduction in expense for fleet overhead and repairs and maintenance

                (47,498)

Capital Outlay:
     Reduction in capital due to a one time equipment purchase during Fiscal Year 2013

                  (6,925)

                (12,600)
                 45,100

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 193

Public Works Department - Sanitation Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Sanitation Fund ‐ 409

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       16,421,441 $       11,993,740 $         9,321,584 $        (2,672,156)

Percent 
Difference
‐22.3%

Total Funding

$      16,421,441 $      11,993,740 $         9,321,584 $       (2,672,156)

‐22.3%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Sanitation

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       16,421,441 $       11,993,740 $         9,321,584 $        (2,672,156)

Percent 
Difference
‐22.3%

Total Expenditures

$      16,421,441 $      11,993,740 $         9,321,584 $       (2,672,156)

‐22.3%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,928,510 $            726,855 $            978,605 $            251,750

Operating Expenses

         13,492,932          11,266,885            8,337,565           (2,929,320)

‐26.0%

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

                   5,414                    5,414

100.0%

Total Expenditures

$      16,421,441 $      11,993,740 $         9,321,584 $       (2,672,156)

‐22.3%

                       ‐

Percent 
Difference
34.6%

 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in operating costs due to a reduction in disposal (tip) fees
     Decrease in operating costs due to a reduction in solid waste collection costs
     Decrease in indirect cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation
     study
     Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements
     into Enterprise Funds
     Decrease in operating costs due to the removal of Return on Investment to the General Fund
     Increase funding for two Recyling/Sanitation vehicles
     Increase funding for animal carcass removal from city properties for an unfunded mandate

194 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

          (1,334,546)
             (466,375)
             (403,786)
             (352,202)
               (34,560)
             (221,779)
               420,000
               100,000

Public Works Department - Water and Sewer Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Water & Sewer Fund ‐ 450

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$      95,296,823 $    103,135,165 $    102,343,062 $           (792,103)

Percent 
Difference
‐0.8%

Total Funding

$      95,296,823 $    103,135,165 $    102,343,062 $          (792,103)

‐0.8%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Administration

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         4,059,990 $         1,968,946 $         1,135,085 $           (833,861)

Percent 
Difference
‐42.4%

Customer Service

           2,975,609            2,963,198            3,099,156               135,958

4.6%

Dept Support

         20,558,469          25,107,434          27,608,381            2,500,947

10.0%

Distribution and Collection

         19,933,523          19,672,771          19,929,804               257,033

1.3%

Debt

         29,740,116          31,469,638          31,194,363              (275,275)

‐0.9%

Sustainability

              895,757            1,204,703            1,197,437                   (7,266)

‐0.6%

Treatment

         14,657,693          16,021,451          13,793,769          (2,227,682)

‐13.9%

Utilities Engineering

           2,475,667            4,727,024            4,385,067              (341,957)

‐7.2%

Total Expenditures

$      95,296,823 $    103,135,165 $    102,343,062 $          (792,103)

‐0.8%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$      26,513,880 $      24,135,636 $      26,224,406 $         2,088,770

Percent 
Difference
8.7%

Operating Expenses

         37,797,180          46,983,553          43,090,904          (3,892,649)

‐8.3%

Capital Outlay

           1,592,895               943,338            1,833,389               890,051

94.4%

Debt Service

         29,392,868          31,072,639          31,194,363               121,724

0.4%

Total Expenditures

$      95,296,823 $    103,135,165 $    102,343,062 $          (792,103)

‐0.8%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐)
Personal Services:
     Decrease due to the transfer out of two Environmental Resources personnel to Stormwater
     Increase due to the transfer of the Engineering Survey Division from the General Fund
     Decrease due to the transfer of one Admin Assistant I to the Department of Sustainable Development
     Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments
Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in equipment repairs & maintenance funds for one time replacement costs included in FY 2013
     Decrease in budget for chemicals for prior year encumbrances and actual expenditure history
     Decrease in security service funds for prior year encumbrances
     Increase in indirect cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in diesel expenses due to an assumed decrease in fuel price per gallon
     Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
Capital Outlay:
     Increase in Fleet vehicle purchase expenses due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
     Increase in one‐time capital costs to purchase a resistive load trailer to maintain emergency generators
     Increase in one‐time capital costs to purchase an additional TV Truck Camera System
     Decrease in computer hardware, software and equipment cost for one‐time purchases in FY 2013

$           (255,386)
           1,095,256
               (74,795)
              886,453
         (2,554,285)
         (1,044,279)
             (171,197)
              872,660
             (326,616)
             (238,624)
             (469,914)

           1,034,800
                 40,000
              145,000
             (238,752)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 195

Public Works Department - Central Regional Water System
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source
FY 2012
Actual

Central Regional Wastewater System 
Fund ‐ 451
Total Funding

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar
Difference

$       16,555,278 $       19,374,408 $       16,758,393 $        (2,616,015)
$       16,555,278 $       19,374,408 $       16,758,393 $        (2,616,015)

Percent 
Difference
‐13.5%
‐13.5%

Financial Summary ‐ Program Expenditures
FY 2012
Actual
$         1,553,371

FY 2013
Amended
$         2,184,793

FY 2014
Adopted
$         1,922,771

Dollar
Difference

Treatment

$           (262,022)
         15,001,907          17,189,615          14,835,622           (2,353,993)

‐12.0%
‐13.7%

Total Expenditures

$       16,555,278

$       19,374,408

$       16,758,393

$        (2,616,015)

‐13.5%

Debt

Percent 
Difference

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
Actual
$         2,801,643

FY 2013
Amended
$         2,676,174

FY 2014
Adopted
$         2,785,239

Dollar
Difference

Percent 
Difference

Operating Expenses

$             109,065
         11,122,677          13,857,100          11,844,168           (2,012,932)

4.1%
‐14.5%

Capital Outlay

            1,136,674                715,490                206,215               (509,275)

‐71.2%

Debt Service

            1,494,284             2,125,645             1,922,771               (202,874)

‐9.5%

Total Expenditures

$       16,555,278

$       19,374,408

$       16,758,393

$        (2,616,015)

‐13.5%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in equipment repairs and maintenance funds for one time reactor/mixer repairs in FY 2013
     Decrease in chemical expenses for prior year encumbrances and prior year usage
     Decrease in indirect cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in diesel expenses due to an assumed decrease in fuel price per gallon
     Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
Capital Outlay:
     Decrease in other equipment funds for one time expenses for influent screens and sludge feed well 

$           (520,776)
              (877,215)
              (417,349)
              (360,110)
              (121,743)
                (96,300)

              (487,570)

     mixers in FY 2013
Debt Service:
     Decrease in State Revolving Loan debt expense for principal and interest payments

196 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

              (202,874)

Public Works Department - Stormwater Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Stormwater Fund ‐ 470

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         4,012,887 $         5,329,116 $         6,038,731 $             709,615

Percent 
Difference
13.3%

Total Funding

$         4,012,887 $         5,329,116 $         6,038,731 $             709,615

13.3%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,230,126 $         1,770,462 $         1,678,907 $              (91,555)

Dept Support

Percent 
Difference
‐5.2%

Distribution and Collection

            2,533,190             2,662,181             3,365,837                703,656

26.4%

Sustainability

               187,103                819,504                913,193                  93,689

11.4%

Treatment

                 62,468                  76,970                  80,794                     3,824

5.0%

Total Expenditures

$         4,012,887 $         5,329,116 $         6,038,731 $             709,615

13.3%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,624,466 $         2,009,767 $         2,475,306 $             465,539

Percent 
Difference
23.2%

Operating Expenses

            2,192,894             3,319,349             2,837,357               (481,992)

‐14.5%
100.0%

Capital Outlay

               192,658                         ‐

               726,068                726,068

Debt Service

                    2,870                         ‐

                        ‐

                             ‐

0.0%

Total Expenditures

$         4,012,887 $         5,329,116 $         6,038,731 $             709,615

13.3%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐)
Personal Services:
     Increase due to the transfer of two Street Sweeper positions from the Sanitation Fund
$             140,569
     Increase due to the transfer of two Environmental Resources positions from the Water & Sewer Fund                255,386
Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in other professional services for one‐time dredging and storm drain services in FY 2013
     Increase in accounts receivable write‐off expenses based on a three year average
     Decrease in indirect cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
      Increase in Disposal Tip Fees due to the addition of the Melrose Ditch contract
Capital Outlay:
     Increase in Fleet vehicle purchase expenses due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
     Increase in one‐time capital costs to purchase a compact excavator for installation and repair 
     of stormwater pipes and outfalls

              (118,885)
               100,860
              (121,149)
                (81,334)
              (271,860)
                 24,045
               655,000
                 60,000

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 197

Public Works Department - Vehicle Rental (Fleet) Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Vehicle Rental (Fleet) Fund ‐ 583

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       21,069,793 $       20,323,355 $       15,276,678 $        (5,046,677)

Percent 
Difference
‐24.8%

Total Funding

$       21,069,793 $       20,323,355 $       15,276,678 $        (5,046,677)

‐24.8%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       13,589,357 $       20,323,355 $       15,276,678 $        (5,046,677)

Fleet Services
Debt Services

            7,480,436                         ‐

Total Expenditures

                        ‐

                        ‐

$       21,069,793 $       20,323,355 $       15,276,678 $        (5,046,677)

Percent 
Difference
‐24.8%

0.0%
‐24.8%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services
Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Debt Services
Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             307,704 $             334,311 $             260,966 $              (73,345)

Percent 
Difference
‐21.9%

         11,043,496          14,376,410          11,782,167           (2,594,243)
            2,238,157             5,612,634             3,233,545           (2,379,089)
            7,480,436                         ‐
                        ‐
                        ‐

‐18.0%
‐42.4%
0.0%

$       21,069,793 $       20,323,355 $       15,276,678 $        (5,046,677)

‐24.8%

Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in gasoline & diesel fuel funds due to the removal of the 12% hurricane contingency and
     an assumed decrease in fuel price per gallon
     Increase in other professional service funds due to hiring a fuel hedging consultant
     Decrease in management operation funds due to a reduction in non contract work history 
     Decrease in indirect cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
     Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study

$        (1,025,851)
                 22,000
              (247,039)
              (645,400)
              (596,321)

Capital Outlay:
     Reduction in vehicle purchases for prior year encumbrances
          (1,857,634)
     Reduction in Fleet vehicle expenditures due to movement of vehicle replacements into Enterprise Funds           (1,200,000)
               321,455
     Increase in other equipment to fund the in‐car camera Driver Enhancement Program

198 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development
Organizational Chart
TOTAL FTE's - 140.1

ADMINISTRATION
Sustainable Development Director
Deputy Director
Financial Administrator
Performance Analyst
Secretary III
Senior Accounting Clerk
Senior Management Fellow
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant II

CODE ENFORCEMENT
Community Inspections Supervisor
Administrative Aide
Clerk III
Code Compliance Officer
Secretary I
Senior Code Compliance Officer
Service Clerk
Administrative Assistant II

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

URBAN DESIGN & PLANNING
2
1
5.4
12
1
4
1
1

ECONOMIC & COMMUNITY
REINVESTMENT
BEACH REDEVELOPMENT
Assistant to the City Manager
Engineering Design Manager
Clerk II

1
1
1

COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT
Community Redev Agency Director
Engineering Design Manager
CRA Project Coordinator
Planner III
Clerk III

1
1
1
1
1

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Business Assistance Coordinator
Economic Development Representative
Secretary III

1
1
1

HOUSING & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Housing & Community Dev. Program Mgr.
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant I
Administrative Assistant II
Construction Review Specialist
Senior Accounting Clerk
PT Construction Review Specialist

1
2
3
2
2
1
1

Urban Design & Development Manager
Administrative Aide
Building Inspector II
Chief Zoning Examiner
Clerk II
Clerk III
Landscape Inspector
Landscape Plans Examiner
Planner I
Planner II
Planner III
Planning Assistant
Principal Planner
Principal Planner
Secretary I
Structural Plans Examiner
Zoning & Landscape Inspector
Zoning Administrator
Engineer
Administrative Assistant I
Land Development Manager
Project Engineer

BUILDING SERVICES
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

Building Services Manager
Administrative Aide
Building Inspector
Building Inspector II
Building Inspector III
Building Official
Chief Building Inspector
Chief Electrical Inspector
Chief Mechanical Inspector
Chief Plumbing Inspector
Clerk I
Clerk II
Clerk III
Electrical Inspector
Electrical Plans Examiner
Floodplain & Energy Calculation Spc.
Mechanical Inspector II
Mechanical Plans Examiner
Permit Services Coordinator
Plumbing Inspector
Plumbing Inspector II
Plumbing Plans Examiner
Service Clerk
Structural Plans Examiner
PT Permit Intake Service Clerk

1
1
11
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
12
2
0.7

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 199

Department of Sustainable Development
Building and Code Services

Division Description

Building and Code Services is responsible for all permitting and code compliance efforts in the City. In this effort,
Building and Code Services provides records, issues permits, and performs building inspections. A major focus of
the division is to ensure that commercial and residential buildings and structures comply with the Florida Building
Code and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Further, Building and Code Services’ code compliance
responsibilities protect the health, safety, and welfare of our neighbors by conducting a fair and equitable
comprehensive code compliance effort that fosters voluntary compliance efforts and prompt corrections of
violations. The division provides quick response to remedy community concerns and oversees and administers
quasi-judicial boards and hearings as mandated through state requirements in the enforcement of code
violations.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments










Reduced the time to issue a permit 25% by streamlining the plan review process.
Reduced the initial number of plan review days from 13.12 to 7.7 days (41% reduction).
Permits reviewed annually by the Building & Code Services Division are five times higher than other cities
reporting to the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC).
Permits issued annually by the Building & Code Services Division are four times higher than other cities
with similar populations reporting to the International City/County Manager’s Association (ICMA).
Implemented a Vacant Property Registration program. To date 265 properties have registered, with net
revenue to the City of $26,500.
Implemented a Robo Call System for illegal signs.
Implemented Commercial Corridor Inspectors, increasing response and service to the City’s major
roadways.
Implemented a Lien Amnesty Program.
Conducted a code compliance process improvement focused on improving operational efficiencies and
overall code compliance outcomes.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives








Advance the FY2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priority: Code Compliance Process Improvement
recommendations.
Conduct digital imaging of all building plans and related files.
Implement electronic permitting to further reduce plan intake and review time. Electronic permitting also
requires less physical storage for building plans, eliminating future storage costs.
Conduct additional training and certifications programs for the building staff.
Organize the inspection areas by Commission District.
Utilize a more mobile approach to Code Compliance, working as a team in areas of concern or
redevelopment.
Implement process improvement recommendations.

200 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development
Building and Code Services, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Enhance the beauty, aesthetics, and environmental quality of neighborhoods (NE 5-2)
-Facilitate a responsive and proactive business climate (BD 7-2)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Ensure that
commercial and
residential
buildings and
structures comply
with FBC and all
other applicable
laws and
ordinances
(NE 5-2)(BD 7-2)

Total job valuation of residential and
commercial building permits
2
Total number of permits issued
Number of permits issued per 1,000
residents (165,521)
Average turn-around time in business
days for initial plan review
Percentage of plans reviewed within
initial ten business days
Total number of plan reviews
5
performed
Total number of inspections
6
performed
Percentage of inspections completed
within the day after request

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

$784,677,966

$665,367,892

$709,847,417

$700,687,371

23,271

20,510

23,327

21,984

140.59

123.98

141

137.50

1

3

11.60
4
13.12
3
76%
4
73%
3
44,897
4
68,089
3
87,411
4
98,702
3
99.998
4
99.997

3

8.93
4
10.06
3
79%
4
76%
3
42,330
4
65,225
3
83,548
4
96,399
3
99.997
4
99.996

3

9.75
4
11.3
3
80%
4
76%
3
46,684
4
100,147
3
86,258
4
108,350
3
99.99
4
99.99

3

7
4
8
3
80%
4
80%
3
44,228
4
69,178
3
88,847
4
101,038
3
99.99%
4
99.99%

1

Significant increase due to County Courthouse permit submittal
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Manager’s Association (ICMA). The FY2012 reported average is 5,518 for populations
between 100,000 and 249,999.
3
Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing (BEMP)
4
Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, Engineering, Fire, Landscaping, Zoning
5
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The FY 2012 reported average is 9,258.76 for all plan reviews
completed.
6
This measure is benchmarked by FBC. The FY 2012 reported average is 18,773.57 for Building, Electrical, Mechanical, and Plumbing (BEMP)
inspections.
2

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 201

Department of Sustainable Development
Building and Code Services, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Enhance the beauty aesthetics and environmental quality of neighborhoods
(NE 5-2)

Department
Objective

Performance Measures

Ensure wellmaintained private
and public
property. (NE 5-2)

Average number of code
inspections completed per
code officer
Percentage of code compliance
cases pro-actively identified2
Number of code violation
cases3
Percentage of cases resolved
through voluntary compliance4
Average number of days from
complaint to first inspection6

1

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual1

FY 2014
Target

3,619

2,908

2,474

2,500

84%

85%

69.1%

70%

18,757

15,801

12,855

13,000

87%

88%

82.8%

75%5

1.14

1.0

1.06

1.8

The Code Compliance team is no longer responsible for enforcing Business Tax violations which will result in fewer code
cases/inspections being performed than targeted.
2
This measure is benchmarked by the Florida Benchmarking Consortium (FBC). The FY 2012 reported average is 63.2%.
3
This measure is benchmarked by the International City/County Managers Association (ICMA). The FY 2012 reported average is 6,326
for populations between 100,000 and 249,999. The average for all participating jurisdictions is 8,050.
4
This is benchmarked by ICMA. The FY 2012 reported average is 68%.
5
This measure is anticipated to drop as we process cases faster to the Special Magistrate.
6
This measure is benchmarked by ICMA. The FY 2012 reported average is 3 days for populations between 100,000 and 249,999.

202 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development
Economic and Community Reinvestment

Division Description
Economic and Community Reinvestment is responsible for all economic development and community
development activities along with the administration of housing programs. Economic Development
responsibilities include business attraction, retention and expansion activities; providing business liaison
functions for the business community. It also includes the implementation of the Community Redevelopment
Agency’s (CRA) plan with the primary goal of eliminating slum and blight and encouraging economic
development. The division also oversees the Beach Business Improvement District and the Enterprise Zone
program. Housing and community development responsibilities include the administration, management and
implementation of Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and State (Florida Housing
Finance Corporation (FHFC) grant funded programs. These programs include Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG), HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME), Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG), Housing
Opportunities for Persons with HIV/AIDS (HOPWA), Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP1 and NSP3 are
stimulus programs) and the State Housing Initiatives Partnership (SHIP). These programs are used to enhance
the quality of life for low and moderate-income households within the City of Fort Lauderdale.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments


Fort Lauderdale was named among the “Top 10 Small American Cities of the Future” for economic
potential by fDi Magazine
 Created the Economic and Community Reinvestment Division – Economic Development, CRAs, &
Housing and Community Development.
 Revised the Northwest Regional Activity Zoning Ordinance eliminating Liquor and Convenient Stores as
Permitted Uses to reduce liquor and convenience stores in the area and calls for police services in the
redevelopment area.
 Provided the Marine Industry Status Report to the City Commission outlining issues of importance to
the long-term success of the marine industry such as dredging, dock expansions, regulatory challenges
and workforce readiness.
 Held the Grand Opening of Bank of America at Shoppes on Arts Avenue representing the first banking
facility to ever locate to Sistrunk Boulevard.
 The implementation of the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) created efficiencies and
greater accountability for sub-recipients.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Advance the following FY2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priorities: Northwest CRA Five-Year
Strategy and Create a Comprehensive Economic Development Strategic to adopt a more formalized
approach to retain jobs and recruit new businesses to Fort Lauderdale.
Develop an Affordable Housing Strategy to properly apply good planning principles to ensure housing
opportunities are available in the entire City.
Implement a Business Development Program that will provide a one-stop resource outlet for
information, financial assistance, and professional development for large and small business owners.
Develop an integrated HOPWA Housing Model by looking at all the housing options available for
HOPWA clients, plus the medical assistance provided to the clients through the County, and develop an
integrated approach to ensure homeownership and rental opportunities.
Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO) Request for Proposal in order to create
additional affordable homeownership or rental opportunities with local housing agency(ies).
Improve audit quality to ensure that HCD continues to meet the audit requirements of the City, the
External Auditor, City Auditor, HUD Auditor and State Monitoring Agency; ensuring that administrative
policies and procedures are consistent with local, State, and federal requirements.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 203

Department of Sustainable Development
Economic and Community Reinvestment, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Define, cultivate, and attract targeted and emerging industries (BD 7-1)
- Facilitate a responsive and proactive business climate (BD 7-2)
- Enhance the beauty, aesthetics, and environmental quality of
neighborhoods (NE 5-2)

Department Objective

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Create new jobs and
facilitate investment
(BD 7-1)

Number of newly created jobs
from QTI and ED Direct Cash
Grants

52

116

499

300

Provide business
outreach and
streamline interactions
(BD 7-2)

Number of business education
events

10

20

25

15

Percentage of annual revenue
spent on public improvements in
the Beach CRA

39%

21.8%

18%

57%

Percentage of annual revenue
spent on public improvements in
the NPF CRA

27%

145%1

11.5%

16%

Eliminate slum and
blight conditions in
Community
Redevelopment Agency
(CRA) areas
(NE 5-2)
1

During FY2012, the largest amount of CRA funds was spent on the Sistrunk project, approximately $6M. When combined with other
public investment funding allocations the sum is above annual revenue.

204 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development
Economic and Community Reinvestment, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Ensure a range of housing option for current and future neighbors (NE 6-2)

Department
Objective

Provide
decent, safe,
sanitary,
affordable
housing and
economic
opportunities
for low and
moderate
income
households.
(NE 6-2)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Total number of rehabilitated units
completed

*

20

18

20

Private investment from lending
institutions leveraged through
homebuyer and developer assisted
programs

*

$1,501,931

$1,629,414

$2,000,000

Total number of clients served through
the Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG) Public Service Programs

*

2,206

1,810

2,200

Number of HOPWA households who
obtained self-sufficiency in the
reported fiscal year

*

60

69

60

*

614

592

620

*

222

215

235

Performance Measures

Number of Housing Opportunities for
Persons with HIV/AIDS (HOPWA)
households who are moving towards
self-sufficiency through the use of
HOPWA housing subsidy and supports
in the reported fiscal year
Number of HOPWA households who
maintained self-sufficiency through the
use of HOPWA short term housing
assistance in the reported fiscal year

1

*This is a newly identified performance indicator. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
The number of clients served through CDBG Public Service Programs is lower than projected due to two CDBG agencies not spending any
CDBG funds, and being unable to provide documentation to show eligible families were served.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 205

Department of Sustainable Development
Urban Design and Planning
Division Description
Urban Design and Planning encourages and directs orderly growth, and promotes well-designed development.
This is done through sound planning principles that focus on community development, urban revitalization,
long-range planning, and historic preservation. These efforts strive to implement the goals, objectives, and
policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Unified Land Development Regulations (ULDR), as well as various
master planning and community planning initiatives intended to improve neighborhoods. Urban Design and
Planning services include the review and processing of applications for development plans, and coordinating
the presentation of development proposals to obtain public input before various advisory boards, committees
and the City Commission.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments






Since January 2013 the Property and Right-of-way Committee (PROW) meetings have been combined
with the Development Review Committee (DRC) meetings reducing review times from up to 3 months
to as little as 4 weeks. This has added a valuable reduction in review time with applicants receiving all
relevant comments in a much more timely manner and thus saving the applicant not only time and
money, but reducing the added complexity of two separate meetings held at different locations, times
and dates. Since this combination has occurred the DRC has reviewed approximately 24 right-of-way
and/or City property related items through this new process.
Completed an ULDR amendment to provide a process for the allocation of flexibility units in the
Downtown RAC to make additional units available for development in the Downtown.
Prepared a draft Land Use Plan Amendment report to increase the supply of dwelling units in the
Downtown RAC by 5,000 units.
Prepared new Transit Oriented Development chapter of the Downtown Master Plan.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Advance the following FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priority: Ordinance Updates for Various
Master Plans included below:
Evaluate the Comprehensive Plan and prepare an evaluation and appraisal letter to reflect changes in
state requirements that were made since the last time the comprehensive plan was updated, and
identify required plan updates based on local conditions. The comprehensive plan shall provide the
principles, guidelines, standards, and strategies for the orderly and balanced future economic, social,
physical, environmental, and fiscal development of the City.
Continue to develop Master Plan design guidelines for the Central Beach area and incorporate them
into the City’s code to shape new development in accordance with the Master Plan’s vision of fostering
a dynamic, mixed use, and pedestrian friendly urban beach destination.
Amend the ULDR (Neighborhood Development Criteria Revisions (NDCR) project) to implement the
community vision for residential neighborhoods, as a follow-up to the NDCR study, which evaluated
regulations that address mass and scale in residentially zoned areas.
Update and expand the South RAC Master Plan’s and the Downtown Master Plan’s Transit Oriented
Development (TOD) section to include TOD guidelines and principles around the future Wave Streetcar
sections located in the Downtown Regional Activity Center (RAC). This section will include TOD
guidelines and principles intended to shape future growth and redevelopment around station areas,
including transit-supportive design, land use and parking standards.

206 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development
Urban Design and Planning, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
-Evolve and update the land development code to balance neighborhood quality, character,
and livability (NE 6-1)
Department
Objective

Ensure orderly
growth and
well-designed
development.
(NE 6-1)

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Number of historic Certificates of
Appropriateness (COA) reviewed

10.5

12

17

15

Number of adopted code
amendments per FTE

2.5

8

5

6.5

431

352

953

954

*

*

115

286

Number of minor projects
submitted, citywide

*

*

487

220

Number of Site Plan Level III (SP
III)8 and Site Plan Level IV (SP IV)9
projects approved, city-wide

*

*

2610

35

Number of Development Review
Committee (DRC) applications
(including DRAC) submitted
citywide
Number of the submitted citywide (including DRAC) projects
approved

*

This is a newly identified performance measure. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
Seven were submitted within the Downtown Regional Activity Center (DRAC).
2
10 were within the DRAC.
3
15 within DRAC
4
10 are anticipated to be within the DRAC.
5
Four of these projects were within the DRAC. The department started collecting data for this indicator in the third quarter of FY 2013
6
The number of projects submitted and approved is driven heavily by the market.
7
The department started collecting data for this indicator in the third quarter of FY 2013
8
SP III applications are reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board (P&Z), and consist of conditional use, parking reduction, flex allocation,
cluster development, modification of yards (RMM-25, RMH-25, RMH-60), and waterway use (some exceptions) applications.
9
SP IV applications are reviewed by Commission in addition to P&Z (rezoning, right-of-way vacation, plat approval, public purpose use, land
use amendment, and specified development and yard modifications in certain beach districts), or by the City Commission without P&Z
review (plat amendment, and vacation of easement).
10
The department started collecting data for this indicator in the second quarter of FY 2013
1

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 207

Department of Sustainable Development - General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       7,923,719 $       6,480,862 $         7,541,021 $         1,060,159

Percent 
Difference
16.4%

Total Funding

$       7,923,719 $       6,480,862 $         7,541,021 $         1,060,159

16.4%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures
FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             92,550 $          100,001 $            112,139 $               12,138

Building Services
Code Enforcement
Economic Development
Housing & Community Development
Urban Design and Planning

         3,377,560
             527,665
             139,637
         3,786,308

Total Expenditures

$       7,923,719 $       6,480,862 $         7,541,021 $         1,060,159

         2,554,025
         1,089,101
               70,978
         2,666,757

           2,420,988
               970,979
                        ‐
           4,036,915

             (133,037)
             (118,122)
               (70,978)
           1,370,158

Percent 
Difference
12.1%

‐5.2%
‐10.8%
‐100.0%
51.4%
16.4%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services
Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay
Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       6,904,304 $       4,937,646 $         5,797,798 $            860,152

         1,019,415          1,535,513            1,743,223                207,710
                      ‐
                 7,703                         ‐
                  (7,703)
$       7,923,719 $       6,480,862 $         7,541,021 $         1,060,159

Percent 
Difference
17.4%

13.5%
‐100.0%
16.4%

Personal Services:
   Increase in personal services due to the transfer in of Right of Way positions from Public Works and other $           862,328
   adjustments to salaries, wages, and benefits
Operating Expenses:
   Increase due to expenditures  associated with the Right of Way function and other professional services
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget included one time expenses

             368,286
              (65,653)

Capital Outlay:
   Reduction in capital outlay due to one ‐time equipment purchase during the fiscal year 2013

 
                 (7,703)

208 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development - CRA Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source
FY 2012
Actual

Community Redevelopment Agency 
(CRA) Fund ‐ 106
Total Funding

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar
Difference

Percent 
Difference

$         2,690,980 $         3,412,934 $         3,385,609 $              (27,325)

‐0.8%

$         2,690,980 $         3,412,934 $         3,385,609 $             (27,325)

‐0.8%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Community Redevelopment Agency

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         2,690,980 $         3,412,934 $         3,385,609 $              (27,325)

Percent 
Difference
‐0.8%

Total Expenditures

$         2,690,980 $         3,412,934 $         3,385,609 $             (27,325)

‐0.8%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Operating Expenses

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,356,167 $         1,088,888 $         1,027,026 $              (61,862)
            1,334,813             2,218,135             2,287,673                  69,538

Capital Outlay

                       ‐

               105,910                  70,910                 (35,000)

‐33.0%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$         2,690,980 $         3,412,934 $         3,385,609 $             (27,325)

‐0.8%

Personal Services

Percent 
Difference
‐5.7%
3.1%

Personal Services:
   Increase due to an adjustment to personnel complement

$              (64,644)

Operating Expenses:
   Increase in professional services for special projects and surveys
   The FY 2013 Amended Budget included one time purchases

                 67,000
                   3,810

Capital Outlay:
   Decrease in capital expenditures due to one‐time beach project in fisacl year 2013

                (35,000)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 209

Department of Sustainable Development - HCD Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source
FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar 
Difference

Percent 
Difference

Housing & Community Development 
(HCD) Grants Fund ‐ 108

$       14,151,827 $       13,086,055 $       10,045,754 $        (3,040,301)

‐23.2%

Total Funding

$       14,151,827 $       13,086,055 $       10,045,754 $        (3,040,301)

‐23.2%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures
FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar 
Difference

Percent 
Difference

Housing & Community Development

$       14,151,827 $       13,086,055 $       10,045,754 $        (3,040,301)

‐23.2%

Total Expenditures

$       14,151,827 $       13,086,055 $       10,045,754 $        (3,040,301)

‐23.2%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Operating Expenses

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,204,977 $             875,201 $         1,029,260 $             154,059
            8,221,326                212,333                144,080                 (68,253)

Captial Outlay

            1,344,946                        ‐

Grant Services

            3,380,578          11,998,521             8,872,414           (3,126,107)

‐26.1%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$       14,151,827 $       13,086,055 $       10,045,754 $        (3,040,301)

‐23.2%

Personal Services

                       ‐

                       ‐

Percent 
Difference

17.6%
‐32.1%
0.0%

Personal Services:
   Increase due to adjustments in salaries, wages, and benefits

$             276,405

Operating Expenses:
   Decrease in professional services

                (37,040)

Grant Services:
   Decrease in the grant funding

 
          (2,823,207)

210 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Department of Sustainable Development - BID Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source
FY 2012
Actual

Beach Business Improvement District 
(BID) Fund ‐ 135
Total Funding

FY 2013
Amended

FY 2014
Adopted

Dollar 
Difference

Percent 
Difference

$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

‐1.5%

$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

‐1.5%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Beach Business Improvement District

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

Percent 
Difference
‐1.5%

Total Expenditures

$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

‐1.5%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Operating Expenses
Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

Percent 
Difference
‐1.5%

$          532,200 $          684,032 $            674,056 $               (9,976)

‐1.5%

Operating Expenses:
 

                      ‐

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 211

Department of Sustainable Development - Building Funds
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Building Funds ‐ 140, 141, & 142

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       6,976,043 $       7,352,042 $       10,804,251 $         3,452,209

Percent 
Difference
47.0%

Total Funding

$       6,976,043 $       7,352,042 $       10,804,251 $         3,452,209

47.0%

Financial Summary - Program Expenditures

Building Permits

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       6,817,765 $       7,059,582 $       10,005,188 $         2,945,606

Percent 
Difference
41.7%

Building Certification Maintenance

               46,939                68,302               353,019               284,717

416.9%

Building Technology

            111,338             224,159               446,044               221,885

99.0%

Total Expenditures

$       6,976,043 $       7,352,042 $       10,804,251 $         3,452,209

47.0%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar 
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$       5,281,977 $       4,921,925 $         5,422,464 $            500,539

Percent 
Difference
10.2%

Operating Expenses

         1,683,422          2,430,117            5,291,787            2,861,670

117.8%

Capital Outlay

               10,643                      ‐

                 90,000                  90,000

100.0%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$       6,976,043 $       7,352,042 $       10,804,251 $         3,452,209

47.0%

Personal Services:
   Increase in personal services due to the addition of two new full‐time positions and a part‐time position
    Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

$           245,512
             153,603

Operating Expenses:
   Increase in operating expenses due to additional funding for temporary staffing assistance during peak times
   Increase in operating expenses for digital imaging services to assist with the backlog of documents
   Increase in operating expenses to purchase a digital imaging machine to implement an in‐house program
   Increase in training for staff at all levels of the organization

          1,352,000
          1,000,000
             500,000
             274,498

Capital Outlay:
   Increase in capital outlay for Building Improvements

 
                90,000

212 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Transportation and Mobility Department
Organizational Chart

TOTAL FTE's - 108.0

Deputy Director
Assistant Airport Manager
Airport Operations Supervisor
Administrative Aide
Administrative Assistant I
Administrative Assistant II
Airport Operations Aide
Airport Programs Administrative Aide
Business Assistance Coordinator
Graphic Designer
Intern
Noise Abatement Officer
Senior Accounting Clerk
Airport Maintenance Technicians

PARKING SERVICES

ADMINISTRATION

EXECUTIVE AIRPORT
1
2
1
2
1
1
3
1
1
1
0.8
1
1
3

Transporation & Mobility Dir
Business Manager
Department Budget Coordinator
Accounting Clerk
Administrative Assistant I
Administrative Aide

1
1
1
5.4
1
2

TRANSPORTATION

Transportation Manager
Mobility Manager
Project Engineer
Principal Planner
Transportation Planner
Planner II
PT Clerk III

1
1
1
1
1
2
1.5

Parking Services Manager
Parking Operations Supervisor
Administrative Aide
Senior Customer Service Representative
Customer Service Representative I
Customer Service Representative
Municipal Maintenance Worker II
Office Supervisor
Parking Enforcement Shift Coord.
Parking Enforcement Specialist
Parking Facilaties Maintenance Coord.
Parking Meter Mechanic
Parking Meter Technician
Parking Meter Technician Trainee
Planner II
Security Guard III
Security Guard II
Security Guard I
Senior Parking Meter Mechanic

1
2
1
1
4
1.4
5
1
2
22.1
1
6
6
3
1
1
2.7
4.5
1

ARTS & SCIENCE DISTRICT GARAGE

Lot Attendant

1.6

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 213

Transportation and Mobility Department
Parking Services
Division Description
The availability of safe, affordable, and accessible parking is an element of a vibrant economic
environment and enhances the quality of life for residents and visitors. Professional management and
regulation of the parking inventory ensures public safety on city roadways, provides adequate turnover
for businesses to accommodate customers, and supports cultural and entertainment venues for patrons.
The Parking Services Division is self-sustaining and provides those services using parking and permit fees
as well as citation revenue. That revenue also reduces property taxes with significant contributions to
the General Fund. Parking Services Division is a 24-hour per day operation that manages, operates, and
maintains over 10,100 parking spaces citywide including four garages, 34 lots, and on-street metered
spaces. The Operations unit manages meters and signage, and provides security for the parking garages
and City Hall. Customer Service responds to parking inquiries and complaints, collects citation payments,
and sells parking permits. The Enforcement unit enforces City and State parking laws and responds to infield public inquiries. The Business unit provides accounting, budgeting, payroll, grant writing and
management, and reporting services for the division as well as the department, as a whole.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments










Implemented a mobile app and enforcement pilot program to allow customers to identify
available spaces using a smart phone and to enhance enforcement within the City.
Implemented a five-day work schedule for Parking Enforcement from a four day work schedule to
improve staffing deployment.
Implemented an improved address and general information correction process resulting in the
updating of over 6,000 customer accounts.
Installed a pilot lot surfacing material application as a “green parking” initiative to reduce the heat
island effect by up to 40% and reduce air temperature 20-30 degrees.
Tested installation of solar powered single-space meters with sensors to alert the public of
available spaces and streamline enforcement operations.
Collected over $700,000 in citation surcharges that support the General Fund School Crossing
Guard program.
Contributed $2.8 million to the General Fund to help reduce neighbors’ ad-valorem taxes.
Implemented a Valet Bicycle Parking program
Began administering the process for red light camera hearings.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives









Implement a license plate recognition system to improve collection of delinquent citations.
Provide Aquatic Center Garage financing and development support to implement the City’s project
goals.
Implement additional parking space sensors to assist with locating available parking spaces via
smart phones to make parking easier for neighbors.
Rehabilitate, landscape, and beautify City-owned parking lots at 11 locations.
Replicate the successful “green parking” pilot initiative conducted in FY 2013 in 4 lots.
Transfer responsibility for review and approvals of vehicles-for-hire applications from Building
Services to Transportation and Mobility to increase efficiency.
Expand on-street parking with Complete Streets elements and sustainable practices.
Adding bicycle parking amenities throughout Fort Lauderdale.

214 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Transportation and Mobility Department
Parking Services, continued
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
- Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)

Department
Objective
Increase
parking
payment
options (IS
12-1)

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Annual increase in payby-phone transactions

*

64%

118%

35%

Number of new revenue
producing parking
spaces

*

1001

-952

150

Performance Measures

*This is a newly identified performance indicator. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
This was not tracked as a performance measure in prior years; totals are estimates.
2
This represents a net loss of parking spaces, including loss of 124 spaces due to A1A reconstruction related to Storm Sandy.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 215

Transportation and Mobility Department
Transportation
Division Description
Fort Lauderdale is the transportation epicenter of Broward County and the region. The Transportation Division’s
long range goal is make the City more walkable and accessible by increasing multi-modal transportation options.
To accomplish those goals, the Division plans and coordinates regional and local transportation development
and improves safety for pedestrians, cyclists, and drivers, while reducing congestion and protecting the
environment. Staff is engaged in planning services for several significant transit initiatives including the Wave
Streetcar, the Central Broward East/West project, potential Florida East Coast (FEC) inter-city commuter service
and support for the Transportation Management Association’s (TMA) Sun Trolley community bus system. To
support and enhance business development and meet our neighbors’ needs, the Division also plans and designs
resolution of traffic issues throughout the City. Local, State and federal, funding partnerships, including grants,
are actively pursued for infrastructure and public transit projects.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments













The Fort Lauderdale WAVE Streetcar partnership was awarded an $18 million TIGER IV grant by the
Department of Transportation for development and construction of the project to create a livable
community by providing viable transportation options.
Received a $1,000,000 MPO Transportation Enhancement Grant for NW 9th Avenue between Broward
Boulevard and Sistrunk Boulevard to enhance safe facilities for pedestrians and bicycles.
Hosted the second Annual Transportation Summit at Florida Atlantic University in May to offer new
perspectives on transportation options.
Completed the Broward Boulevard Gateway Implementation draft plan that seeks to improve mobility,
accessibility, connectivity, and quality of life along Broward Boulevard, with the goal of creating a gateway
to downtown.
Received technical assistance from the Federal Transportation Administration (FTA) to develop the
Environmental and Sustainability Management System to establish policies and procedures to support
our transportation initiatives.
Hosted “Alert Today, Alive Tomorrow” Street Party event to kickoff pedestrian and bike safety awareness
campaign.
Transferred the Housing Authority of the City of Fort Lauderdale (HACFL) community bus operations to
the Fort Lauderdale Transportation Management Agency (TMA) in January 2013 to provide continuity of
service for our neighbors.
Completed 25% of the recommendations from the Downtown Fort Lauderdale Walkability Study to
encourage neighbors to walk instead of drive by making street improvements, streetscape design
improvements, and other traffic calming measures.
Received US EPA Green Streets Initiative technical assistance and held Green Streets Workshop in March
2013 to develop improved water quality and more livable communities, through the integration of
stormwater treatment techniques and the use of natural processes and landscaping.
Assisted the TMA with the launch of the Airport Excursion from Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International
Airport to the downtown area, moving about 400 people per weekend, to enhance their experience in the
City and to support downtown businesses.
In response to one of the priorities identified by the Uptown Fort Lauderdale group, the Transportation
and Mobility department obtained grant funding from the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT)
for $181,773 to operate the uptown link, Monday through Friday from 10am to 3pm for one year. If
project ridership goals are met the grant can be renewed for 2 one-year terms.

216 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Transportation and Mobility Department
Transportation, continued
FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives










Advance the following FY 2014 Commission Annual Action Plan priorities: Downtown Walkability Plan, the
Wave Streetcar, and All Aboard Florida Passenger Rail and Station Area Plan.
Complete the Multimodal Connectivity Map to propose a transport system that offers users diverse
transportation options. The map is the foundation for prioritizing projects to implement Fast Forward Fort
Lauderdale, the City’s 2035 Vision Plan.
Survey and begin upgrading ADA-deficient Sun Trolley stops for compliance, to allow for scheduled
service versus the existing “wave and ride” to increase ridership and generate additional revenue.
Utilize Broward Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) funding to allow the Florida Department of
Transportation (FDOT) to complete 14 bike/sidewalk projects connecting to Broward Boulevard to
enhance pedestrian and bicycle safety with wider sidewalks.
Create a comprehensive citywide traffic calming policy to reduce vehicle speeds and to enhance
pedestrian and bicycle safety.
Train City staff to implement the approved Fort Lauderdale Complete Streets Guidebook’s standards for
future development that enable safe access for all users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and
transit riders of all ages and abilities.
Partner with Broward County Traffic Engineering Division to approve a pedestrian signalization pilot
program for alternative signalization treatments at mid-block crosswalks at multiple locations to enhance
pedestrian safety.
Develop Quiet Zones along the FEC rail corridor in partnership with the MPO, in time for the planned “AllAboard Florida” passenger rail service, to reduce noise from train horns and enhance the quality of life of
our neighbors who live along the tracks.
Complete the Environmental and Sustainability Management Systems (ESMS) training at Virginia Tech to
integrate efficiencies and reduce environmental impact of operations and to prepare staff for ISO 14001
certification
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
-Improve transportation options and reduce congestion by working with agency
partners (IN 1-1)
-Integrate transportation land use and planning to create a walkable and bikeable
community (IN 1-2)
Department
Objective

Increase
transportation
options
(IN 1-1)
Enhance streets to
improve the bicycle
and pedestrian
experience.
(IN 1-2)

Performance Measures

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

Number of Sun Trolley riders

240,237

247,448

500,3561

350,0002

Number of B-Cycle trips

*

10,915

15,057

12,500

Number of Complete Street
& Streetscape projects ready
for design

*

3

6

4

*This is a newly identified performance indicator. Data collection for prior years was not feasible.
1
Includes 185,591 Tri-Rail/Northwest Link passengers not counted in previous years. SunTrolley system also expanded service
on one route and absorbed the former Housing Authority Link (30,732 riders) not included in prior year data.
2
This does not include an estimated increase of 30,000 riders on the additional Downtown Link and 15,000 on the new Uptown
Link to be implemented in FY 2014.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 217

Transportation and Mobility Department
Executive Airport
Division Description
The Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE) is the 5th busiest general aviation airport serving primarily the
business jet market and houses the 2nd busiest general aviation US Customs and Border Protection Facility
in the country. The Executive Airport Division ensures safe and efficient operation of the FXE Airport, the
Downtown Helistop, the Airport Industrial Airpark, and Foreign-Trade Zone #241. The economically
significant Executive Airport’s tenants provide over 5,000 jobs and contribute more than $2 million in
property tax revenue to the City. The Airport is self-sustaining and no general fund dollars are used for the
maintenance, operation, or development of its facilities. Operating revenues and capital improvement
funds are derived from long-term leases and fees to airport users. The Airport administers 38 aviation and
non-aviation leases containing over 300 businesses in 447 hangars totaling over 3 million square feet of
office and warehouse space.

FY 2013 Major Accomplishments








Executive Airport generated $2,114,721 in real estate taxes.
Constructed airfield improvements totaling $1,471,784 to promote economic development
Completed design of U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility, Taxiway Golf relocation, Helistop
Wet Stairway replacement, and security improvement projects.
Renegotiated four Executive Airport leases resulting in redevelopment plans totaling $10.9 million.
Completed Airport Master Drainage Plan and Study to enhance development opportunities.
Held Second Annual Aviation Safety Expo attended by over 130 area pilots.
Initiated environmental mitigation for Executive Airport Parcels, B, C, D and Mills Pond Park.

FY 2014 Major Projects & Initiatives







Coordinate construction of new Air Traffic Control Tower, replacing the existing 40-year old Tower,
which does not meet current height or federal security requirements.
Construct a new LEED certified U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility in order to meet or
current federal guidelines for general aviation facilities and incorporate energy efficient practices and
promote continued sustainable development throughout the City.
Upgrade Airport Administration Office utilizing green/sustainable practices and incorporate energy
efficient practices for City facilities.
Install security cameras and construct security enhancements to ensure a safe and secure
environment for the tenants and users of the Airport.
Complete taxiway enhancement projects to modernize infrastructure and enhance safety, in
accordance with the FAA’s Pavement Management Program recommendations.
Develop an Airport Sustainability Management Plan.

218 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Transportation and Mobility Department
Executive Airport, continued

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
-Deliver best-in-class regional general aviation airport
amenities and services to domestic and international
stakeholders (BD 7-4)
-Ensure sound fiscal management (IS 12-1)
Department
Objective
Market and
promote the
City’s aviation
facilities to
attract airport
business
(BD 7-4)

Maximize
revenues to
ensure selfsustainability
(IS 12-1)

Deliver best-inclass regional
general aviation
airport amenities
(BD 7-4)

Performance
Measures
Number of business
and neighbor
outreach events
hosted
Number of
businesses
registered that meet
FXE Airport
standards to apply
for a Business Tax
License
Total revenue
generated
Fuel flowage
revenue generated
per itinerant
operation
Facilities
constructed or
converted to LEED
standards (including
tenant-owned)
Value of tenant
improvements
constructed

FY 2011
Actual

FY 2012
Actual

FY 2013
Actual

FY 2014
Target

18

39

44

45

22

12

16

30

$7,056,082

$7,257,613

$7,859,404

$7.1M

$9.58

$9.58

$8.74

$9.65

1

0

0

2

$400,000

$350,000

$1M

$7.5M

1

Project to provide for the LEED renovation of the Administration Building will be initiated in FY 2013 and
completed in FY 2014.
2
Number of businesses registered impacted by reduced staffing levels in FY 2013.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 219

Transportation and Mobility Department - General Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

General Fund ‐ 001

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$                          ‐ $         2,424,232 $         1,912,667 $           (511,565)

Total Funding

$                      ‐

$         2,424,232 $         1,912,667 $           (511,565)

Percent
Difference
‐21.1%

‐21.1%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Transportation
Transportation Red Light Camera 
Appeals
Total Expenditures

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$                          ‐ $         2,337,571 $         1,637,385 $           (700,186)

Percent
Difference
‐30.0%

                        ‐

                 86,661                275,282                188,621

217.7%

$                      ‐

$         2,424,232 $         1,912,667 $           (511,565)

‐21.1%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services
Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay

FY 2012
Actual
$                      ‐

FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$             679,061 $             982,988 $             303,927

Percent
Difference
44.8%

                        ‐
                        ‐

            1,730,271                929,679               (800,592)
                 14,900                         ‐
                (14,900)

‐46.3%
‐100.0%

Total Expenditures

$                      ‐

$         2,424,232 $         1,912,667 $           (511,565)

‐21.1%

FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Personal Services:
     Increase in personal service expenses  for the addition of three new part‐time positions in  
     preparation for the new red light special magistrate hearing process
     Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

$             159,069
                 51,907

Operating Expenses:
     Increase in operating expenses for the new red light special magistrate hearing process
     Increase in operating funds for equipment and materials for approved traffic projects, software
     related to transit and transportation, and supplies for approved projects
     Increase in operating funds for traffic studies with offsetting revenues
     Decrease in other contributions for a one‐time payment for the WAVE during FY 2013

               100,000
          (1,100,000)

Capital Outlay:
     Reduction in capital outlay for one‐time purchases during FY 2013

                (14,900)

220 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

               116,213
                 47,500

Transportation and Mobility Department - Parking Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Parking Fund ‐ 461

FY 2012
Actual
$       10,041,472

FY 2013
Amended
$       15,729,402

FY 2014
Adopted
$       14,314,994

Dollar 
Difference
$        (1,414,408)

Percent 
Difference
‐9.0%

Total Funding

$       10,041,472

$       15,729,402

$       14,314,994

$        (1,414,408)

‐9.0%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Parking Services

FY 2012
Actual
$       10,041,472

FY 2013
Amended
$       14,229,478

FY 2014
Adopted
$       12,939,793

Dollar 
Difference
$        (1,289,684)

Percent 
Difference
‐9.1%

Transp. & Mobility Admin Support

                        ‐

            1,499,925             1,375,201               (124,724)

‐8.3%

Total Expenditures

$       10,041,472

$       15,729,402

‐9.0%

$       14,314,994

$        (1,414,408)

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures
Personal Services

FY 2012
Actual
$         4,905,647

FY 2013
Amended
$         5,093,185

Operating Expenses

            5,095,223             9,767,668             8,860,259               (907,409)

‐9.3%

Capital Outlay

                 40,603                868,550                276,329               (592,221)

‐68.2%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$       10,041,472

$       15,729,402

FY 2014
Adopted
$         5,178,406

$       14,314,994

Dollar 
Difference
$               85,221

$        (1,414,408)

Personal Services:
     Decrease due to the transfer of a Transportation Project Engineer into the General Fund
     Increase to fund a new Parking Enforcement Specialist for the booting team 
     Increase to convert a part time Accounting Clerk to full time
     Increase to fund a new Administrative Aide split between Parking, Airport, and the TMA
     Increase in personal services due to salary adjustments

‐9.0%

$           (115,820)
                 71,687
                 12,263
                 52,383
                 93,483

Operating Expenses:
     Decrease in operating funds for one‐time encumbered expenses that straddled multiple years and have 
     been reduced to reflect services rendered for the upcoming fiscal year (i.e. other services, components
     & parts, and other supplies)
     Increase in operating funds for an upgrade zT2 Flex Citation and Permit Management System
     Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
     Adjustment in the Return on Investment and Indirect Administrative Services payment to the General Fund
Capital Outlay:
    Reduction due to one time capital outlay in FY 2013
    Increase to purchase 20 multi‐space meters for East Las Olas Blvd.
     Increase to fund in‐car camera Driver Enhancement Program

Percent 
Difference
1.7%

          (1,024,760)

                 55,000
                (78,540)
               143,077
              (631,050)
               200,000
                 20,329

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 221

Transportation and Mobility Department - Airport Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Airport Fund ‐ 468

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         5,606,436 $         8,378,478 $         7,170,848 $        (1,207,630)

Percent
Difference
‐14.4%

Total Funding

$         5,606,436 $         8,378,478 $         7,170,848 $        (1,207,630)

‐14.4%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Executive Airport

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         5,606,436 $         8,378,478 $         7,170,848 $        (1,207,630)

Percent
Difference
‐14.4%

Total Expenditures

$         5,606,436 $         8,378,478 $         7,170,848 $        (1,207,630)

‐14.4%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services
Operating Expenses
Capital Outlay

FY 2012
FY 2013
FY 2014
Dollar
Actual
Amended
Adopted
Difference
$         1,373,925 $         1,597,093 $         1,669,729 $               72,636

            4,232,511             6,759,385             5,275,401           (1,483,984)
                        ‐
                 22,000                225,718                203,718

Percent
Difference
4.5%

‐22.0%
926.0%

Total Expenditures
$         5,606,436 $         8,378,478 $         7,170,848 $        (1,207,630)
‐14.4%
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):
Personal Services:
     Decrease due to the transfer of the Airport Engineer into the General Fund
$           (134,981)
     Increase in personal services expenses to fund three new Airport Maintenance Technicians
               171,061
                 17,461
     Increase to fund a new Administrative Aide split between Parking, Airport, and the TMA
Operating Expenses:
    Decrease in Fleet vehicle replacement charges due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
    Enterprise Funds
    Decrease in management operations services
    Decrease in the cost of security, lawn and maintenance, and professional services
    Decrease fund  in costs fees and permits
    Decrease in Information Technology Services cost allocation due to an updated cost allocation study
Capital Outlay:
     Increase in Fleet vehicle purchase expenses due to the movement of vehicle replacements into 
     Enterprise Funds
     Increase for the purchase of four new permanent noise monitoring terminals

222 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

              (120,000)
              (248,981)
              (573,487)
              (499,646)
                (89,707)
                 96,200
               120,000

Transportation and Mobility Department - Arts & Science Fund
Departmental Financial Summary
Financial Summary - Funding Source

Arts & Science District Garage Fund ‐ 643

FY 2012
Actual
$          1,150,395

FY 2013
Amended
$          1,476,272

FY 2014
Adopted
$             899,584

Dollar
Difference
$            (576,688)

Percent 
Difference
‐39.1%

Total Funding

$         1,150,395

$         1,476,272

$             899,584

$           (576,688)

‐39.1%

Financial Summary - Division Expenditures

Arts & Science District Garage

FY 2012
Actual
$          1,150,395

FY 2013
Amended
$          1,476,272

FY 2014
Adopted
$             899,584

Dollar
Difference
$            (576,688)

Percent 
Difference
‐39.1%

Total Expenditures

$         1,150,395

$         1,476,272

$             899,584

$           (576,688)

‐39.1%

Financial Summary - Category Expenditures

Personal Services

FY 2012
Actual
$             169,533

FY 2013
Amended
$               65,265

FY 2014
Adopted
$             121,571

Operating Expenses

               980,861             1,276,696                778,013               (498,684)

Capital Outlay

                        ‐

               134,310                         ‐

              (134,310)

‐100.0%

Total Expenditures
 
FY 2014 Major Variances (+/‐):

$         1,150,395

$         1,476,272

$           (576,688)

‐39.1%

$             899,584

Dollar
Difference
$               56,306

Personal Services:
     Increase in part time salaries due to the change from full time cashiers to part time cashiers

Percent 
Difference
86.3%

‐39.1%

                 52,978

Operating Expenses:
    Decrease in revenue collected by attendance reducing the amount of the PACA share, due to the change from 
     full time cashiers to part time cashiers that only work during performances and special events

              (444,220)

Capital Outlay:
     Decrease in capital outlay for one‐time service meter purchase

              (134,310)

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 223

224 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 – FY 2018 Community Investment Plan
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
Infrastructure, transportation, parks, and buildings are the literal foundation of a community. The Community
Investment Plan (CIP) has a unique and important responsibility to delineate what the community needs to build
now and what it will need to build in years to come. This must be done in a strategic, careful, and impactful way to
maximize economic development and improve quality of life in line with the approved City Commission’s vision
and policy. This CIP incorporates the concept of “sustainable infrastructure” which involves connecting a
commitment to sound asset management with an approach that prioritizes community needs within the context
of a sustainable future.
The Community Investment Plan (CIP) is a planning document that sets forth the City's capital improvements to
ensure that municipal infrastructure and facilities are appropriate and adequate to serve the needs of the
neighbors of Fort Lauderdale. The timeline for the CIP process is outlined below:
NovemberDecember
JanuaryFebruary
MarchApril

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

May-June
July

•
•

September
October

•
•

Training materials and instructions distributed
Staff trained
Departments identification and submission of projects
City Manager appoints a Community Investment Plan Project Review
Committee
The relative weight of each criterion is agreed upon as policy by the City
Commission during a Commission Conference.
Budget, CIP and Grants Division Review of Project Applications
Community Investment Plan Project Review Committee evaluation and
prioritization of projects and development of recommendations
Committee recommendations to the City Manager
City Manager recommendations to the City Commission along with the
proposed budget
Commission approval
Implementation of Approved Plan

The projects in the CIP provide the basic necessities, such as the municipal water works, as well as amenities
which make Fort Lauderdale a desirable community in which to live, work and play. Ensuring conformity with the
City's Comprehensive Plan and coordination of capital improvements with the development of the operating
budget to maintain a low tax levy are key objectives to the process. Projects considered in the CIP can be either
capital improvements or capital maintenance projects.
Each proposed capital improvement project must meet the following criteria to be considered as part of the
Community Investment Plan:
•
•
•
•

Represent a physical improvement
Have a value of $50,000 or more
Have a useful life in excess of 10 years; or if bond funded, have a useful life equal to or greater than the
life of the bonds; or if grant funded with asset life qualifying factors, the capital project must have a life
equal to or greater than the life requirements of the grant
Be classified as a capital asset when placed into service

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 225

Each proposed Capital Maintenance project must meet the following criteria:
•
•

Have a value of $50,000 or more
Must be a project that replaces/repairs existing infrastructure, equipment or facilities (examples of capital
maintenance projects include street resurfacing, roof replacements, and playground equipment
replacement)

The City recognizes its on-going responsibility to maintain and improve capital facilities to meet the demands of a
dynamic city. The Five-Year CIP is based on City Commission and Administration’s recognition of the need to have
a comprehensive and financially balanced plan. Pursuant to the City's long range planning objectives, each project
is analyzed and prioritized according to the needs of the community, the project ranking, and the City's ability to
implement the project using available resources. The proposed CIP must also take into consideration the financial
parameters necessary to preserve the City’s fiscal integrity and continued sustainability.
The methodology utilized to develop the Capital Improvement Plan stems from a needs assessment performed by
City staff. The assessment generates a list of projects that address physical and/or structural improvements and
enhancements in various locations within the City. Project applications are then developed and submitted to the
Budget/CIP & Grants Division. Each application involving a physical or structural improvement must include a
project cost estimate form completed by a City engineer. Together, managers and directors develop the proposed
CIP project applications with the goal of meeting and managing the City’s community investment needs.

CIP Prioritization Criteria and Scoring Matrix
Prioritization criteria and a scoring matrix were developed for the Fiscal Year 2014 - 2018 CIP to rank projects for
inclusion in the plan. There are ten criteria that were used by the Community Investment Plan Project Review
Committee, to evaluate the proposed projects. The relative weight of each criterion was agreed upon by the City
Commission during the April 2, 2013 Commission Conference. Each committee member scored projects from 0 to
2 for each of the ten criteria and then a total score was calculated for the project, based on the criteria weight.
This methodology promotes an informed decision making process to formulate a final set of recommendations for
the proposed Community Investment Plan. The prioritization criteria that were used are categorized and
identified below:
Basic Program Attributes
• Meets Federal, state or legal requirement
• Project feasibility
• Costs and sources of funds
• Relevant performance measures
• Project consistency with existing approved plans
Impact on Strategic Goals/Cylinders of Excellence
• Improves traffic, mobility, connectivity, pedestrian safety and cyclist safety
• Environmental benefits
• Addresses aging infrastructure needs and maintenance of existing facilities
• Promotes or accelerates sustainable economic development
• Improves neighbor safety

226 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

The Community Investment Plan Project Review Committee met with each department, reviewed, and ranked all
projects. Following the ranking, the committee summarized the information and made recommendations to the
City Manager. The City Manager then had the opportunity to review project applications to make a final
determination about which projects would be recommended to the City Commission for funding. The project
ranking will also serve to guide the City’s applications for regional, state, federal, or other grant funds throughout
the upcoming fiscal year.
The CIP is a multi-year funding plan as follows:
 Projects funded during the Fiscal Year 2014 Budget cycle: These projects are funded in the City Manager’s
proposed budget and finalized in line with the City Commission’s adopted budget.
 Projects planned for Fiscal Years 2015 – 2018 have funding identified: These projects will be updated on an
annual basis and considered for funding in the respective year of the request. Funding will not be
appropriated until the annual adoption of the CIP via City Commission action.
 FY 2019 and beyond projects are listed as “unfunded” but still necessary: These are projects that have been
identified as a need, but funding is not currently identified. Projects may move out of this category as funding
becomes available, or as the need becomes more critical.
Multi-year projects are identified in phases by year, from design through construction. Again, appropriations are
made on an annual basis, but planning is accomplished on a multi-year basis. Projects may be designed before
construction dollars are secured in order to have “shovel ready” projects as new funding is identified. The
Community Investment Plan is developed annually and presented to the City Commission for adoption of the first
year of the plan along with the City’s Operating Budget. The FY 2014 – FY 2018 Community Investment Plan
document contains the following major sections:
♦ Introduction
♦ FY 2014 Recommended Projects by Cylinder of Excellence
♦ FY 2014 Fund Summaries
♦ FY 2014 - FY 2018 Five Year Community Investment Plan by Funding Source
♦ Capital project applications by funding source
♦ Glossary & Acronyms
The CIP also shows unspent balances for projects that are on-going. This unspent balance is considered as part of
the five year total. Existing projects with funding that are not in need of additional funding are not included in the
project applications. However, they are included in the FY 2014 – FY 2018 Five Year Community Investment Plan.
The five year CIP is balanced based on expected revenues, bonds and other financing mechanisms.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 227

FY 2014 Community Investment Plan
Operating Impact
Operating budget impacts relate the capital and operating budgets in a form useful for decisionmaking by identifying and quantifying the consequences of capital investment. Many capital
improvement projects generate future operating budget costs. New or expanded facilities require
new and continuing annual costs of their own, in addition to the cost of the services and programs
provided and, therefore, contribute to the growth of annual operating budgets. Other new facilities,
such as swimming pools, may generate offsetting revenues from program fees, which provide
additional revenues to help support operating expenses related to the new facility.
Reliable operating cost estimates are a fundamental element of the City’s Community Investment Plan
and the budget development process because the City must determine specific ongoing expenses it
will incur once a project has been completed. During the cost estimating phase of the CIP application
development, factors such as a project location, structural impacts, energy costs, staffing costs, future
maintenance and/or replacement are thoroughly analyzed. This information is provided as a rough
estimate, but it is still critical to consider when determining impacts on future operating budgets and
long-term stabilization.
Each FY 2014 capital project application includes a section where departments identify potential
operating impacts of the project. While these estimates are preliminary, the impact of capital project
operating costs on future budgets requires careful consideration.
Capital projects that are budgeted in Enterprise Funds do not necessarily have an impact on the
General Fund operating budget, however, they must still be taken into consideration since they will
ultimately impact the operating budget of the respective Enterprise funds. The estimated annual
operating impact of all capital projects funded in the FY 2014 Community Investment Plan is a net
annual savings of $314,351, primarily due to expected revenue generated. Details regarding the
estimated operating impact, by project, are provided on the following page.

228 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 Operating Impact by Project
Project
CRA Beach - Fund 346
SR A1A Streetscape Improvements
Westside
Almond Avenue Streetscape
Sebastian St./Alhambra St. Parking Lot
Expansion
CRA NWPFH - Fund 347
NPF CRA Wireless Camera and Wi-Fi
Parking - Fund 461
South Andrews Parking Space and Meter
Installation
Mobile Enforcement for City-Wide Parking
Enhancement
Central Services Operating - Fund 581
City-Wide Telephone System Upgrade –
Phase II

Total

Annual
Operating
Impact
$5,000
2,000
(118,140)

10,000
(149,981)
(55,000)

(8,230)

Comments

Operating costs for landscape maintenance and
electricity
Operating costs such as landscape maintenance and
electricity
$140,000 in additional revenue offset by $21,860 in
additional operating expense
Operating costs for cameras and wi-fi
$167,265 in additional revenue offset by $17,284 in
additional expense
$75,000 in additional revenue offset by $20,000 in
additional expense
Reduction in annual maintenance costs

$(314,351)

The pages that follow provide a detailed listing of the specific projects that are proposed to be funded
in Fiscal Year 2014 and proposed schedules for the Five Year Community Investment Plan by Funding
Source and Cylinder of Excellence.
IMPLEMENTATION
Upon approval of the CIP by the City Commission at the September budget hearings, budgeted dollars
were placed in specific project accounts so projects could begin.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 229

230 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Community Investment Plan
FY 2014 FUNDING RECOMMENDATIONS BY CYLINDER OF EXCELLENCE
The City of Fort Lauderdale’s focus for the Community Investment Plan (CIP) is articulated through six
cylinders of excellence: Business Development, Infrastructure, Internal Support, Neighborhood
Enhancement, Public Places, and Public Safety. Each project recommended to be funded in Fiscal Year
2014 was identified to support a primary cylinder. Many projects have co-benefits to other cylinders in
addition to the primary cylinder where they are listed. In total, $50,081,182 in funding is recommended
for capital project appropriations in Fiscal Year 2014.

BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
Fort Lauderdale is home to a thriving local economy, tourism industry, and boating and marine
industry. Attracting regional and global markets, it is the coastal epicenter of South Florida connecting
Miami-Dade to Palm Beach and west Broward to Port Everglades and Fort Lauderdale International
Airport. Strategic alliances with businesses, associations, and schools contribute to local talent supply.
Investments in transportation and mobility, infrastructure, public places, education, and public safety
have exponential impacts on businesses and economic development.
Projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of the Business Development cylinder of excellence
include:

















Airfield Lighting Rehabilitation - $116,000
Bahia Mar Marina Dredging Project - $206,543
Design & Construction/W Echo Extension - $243,750
Eastern Perimeter Loop Road - $1,000,000
Executive Airport Pedestrian/Bike Path - $250,000
Helistop W Staircase Replacement - $340,000
Las Olas Marina & Aquatics Complex Dredging $466,688
Mizell Center Upgrade - $300,000
New Bahia Mar Dredging - $90,461
NPF CRA Wireless Camera and Wi-Fi - $300,000
Observation Area Parking Expansion - $135,000
R/W 8/26 & 13/31 Pavement Rehabilitation - $108,000
Six Replacement Trolleys For Community Bus –
$1,490,040
Taxiway Echo Pavement Rehabilitation - $2,818,250
Taxiway Foxtrot Pavement Rehabilitation - $17,500
Taxiway Sierra Pavement Rehabilitation - $976,000

FY 2014 Business Development CIP Projects:

$8,858,232

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 231

INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure directly impacts our community every day. Quality infrastructure leads to neighborhood
enhancement, active and safe public places and spurs business development. The country as a whole is
facing a critical dilemma with aging infrastructure and shrinking government budgets. In many areas of
America, the roads, drinking water and wastewater systems are simply too old. This trend directly
applies to the City of Fort Lauderdale as the oldest city in Broward County, and is exacerbated by an
additional challenge- sea level rise. Strategic community investments are important now and for future
generations.
The City of Fort Lauderdale desires to be a multi-modal city. A city that is pedestrian friendly and easy to
move through by roadway, sidewalk, or waterway, with seamless connections to regional mass transit,
such as Tri-Rail, Port Everglades, and the Airports. To achieve this, we must create shaded complete
streets that are easy and enjoyable to walk or bike through, and convenient mass transit properly linked
to land use.
The City must also build a sustainable and resilient infrastructure. This means smart investments in our
community infrastructure for long-term economic and environmental viability and quality of life. This
includes maintaining and updating our roads, bridges, water, wastewater systems, and drainage systems
that plan for sea level rise projections. It includes awareness, planning, and efficiency now to safeguard
our long-term water supply. It also includes reducing our energy use, and sustainable construction and
design, and choosing recycling and reduction over disposal. We must do all of this with the mind toward
protecting fundamental environmental resources: air, water, and natural resources, that sustain our
community.
Projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of the Infrastructure cylinder of excellence
include:
























Aeration Basin At Fiveash Rehab - $200,000
Almond Avenue Streetscape - $250,000
Annual Asphaltic Concrete Resurfacing - $1,200,000
Annual Storm Drainage Contract 2014 - $1,700,000
Annual Utilities Restoration 2014 - $705,000
Boulevard Gardens West Small Water Main - $65,484
Bridge Master Plan - $250,000
City Hall Roof Replacement - $524,600
Dixie Wellfield Raw Water Basin A-19 Rehab - $3,254
Dorsey Riverbend Stormwater Improvements - $200,000
Downtown Sewer Basin PS A-7 Rehabilitation - $272,727
Durrs Area Stormwater Improvements - $200,000
Edgewood Stormwater Improvements - $200,000
Esplanade Restroom Repairs/Renovations - $120,000
Esplanade Restroom Roof Replacement - $15,900
Facilities Security Fence Gates & Cages - $2,303
Fat Village Corridor Improvements - $295,000
Filers 10, 11, 12 & 13 Rehab Fiveash - $344,416
Fiveash WTP Disinfection Improvements - $4,000,000
Fiveash WTP Phase 2 Improvements - $94,016
Flagler Heights Small Water Main Improvements - $971,953
Floyd Hull Morton Center Roof Replacement - $50,375
Imperial Point Large Water Mn – Phase 2 - $1,599,602

232 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget








































Lake Ridge Small Water Main Improvements - $52,102
Mobile Enforcement For Citywide Parking Enhancements - $400,000
Morton Center Sewer Pipe Repair - $25,000
North Beach Parking Lot - $100,000
Northeast Area Large Water Main - $1,238
NW 9th Avenue Enhancement Project - $800,000
NW Second Ave Tank Restoration - $1,323,563
Osswald Park Activity Center Roof Replacement - $75,000
Parks and Recreation Administration Roof Replacement - $40,000
Poinsetta Heights Small Water Main - $502,632
Pump Station B-10 Rehab - $530,019
Pump Station A-12 Rehab - $478,000
Pump Station D-45 Rehab - $426,982
Pump Station B-22 Rehab - $425,594
Pump Station D-37 Rehab - $883,875
Pump Stations A7 & A8 Improvements - $280,000
Progresso Stormwater Improvements - $200,000
Regional Replacement/Recapitalization - $5,288,711
River Oaks Stormwater Park - $300,000
River Oak Stormwater Analysis - $200,000
Riverland Annex SW 21 Street Force Main Repl - $100,000
Sewer Area 19 Annexed Riverland W & S Main - $1,223,404
Shady Banks Small WM Improvement – Phase 2 - $260,204
Sunrise Blvd. Middle Rvr Bdge WM Reloc/Des - $700,000
SE 17 Street Large Water Main Replacement - $300,000
South Andrews Parking Space and Meter Installation - $500,000
South Beach Restroom Renovations - $120,000
Seven Isles Seawall Improvements - $100,000
South Middle River Unpaved Roadways - $424,100
Sidewalk and Paver Replacement - $780,000
SR A1A Streetscape Improvements Westside - $350,000
Snyder Park Restroom Sewer Pipe Repair - $30,000
Utilities IT Special Projects/Replacement - $158,166
Victoria Park B – South Small Water Mains Impr - $700,000
Water & Sewer Master Plan Update - $1,000,000
Water Monitoring System (SCADA) - $274,575
War Memorial Auditorium Roof Replacement - $395,000
W/WTR Flow, Rainfall Monitoring & Summary - $109,000

FY 2014 Infrastructure CIP Projects: $33,121,795

INTERNAL SUPPORT
The City’s mission is to build community. The Cylinders of Excellence are how we build community.
None of this would be possible without the Internal Support platform to motivate and support our
internal workforce community to deliver best-in-class municipal services. An innovative, neighborcentric, and well-trained workforce needs fundamental tools, such as phones, internet, facilities, and
equipment. It also needs programs in place such as employee safety and wellness, training, strategic
performance management and process improvement. This is how we keep up with progressive
communication and service delivery mechanisms desired by our neighbors. In order to be smarter,
FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 233

faster, and cheaper, we must manage our resources wisely and sustainably, through sound fiscal
management, integrating sustainability into daily operations and planning, and procurement of goods
for the best value.
Projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of the Internal Support cylinder of excellence
include:
 City-Wide Telephone System Upgrade-Phase 2 - $890,555
 Replacement Document Management System - $500,000
FY 2014 Internal Support CIP Projects: $1,390,555

NEIGHBORHOOD ENHANCEMENT
Fort Lauderdale is a community of communities with more than 60 unique and charming
neighborhoods, a beautiful beach and a vibrant business and entertainment center. It has both historic
charm and modern urban amenities. The City of
Fort Lauderdale is proud of its active and
engaged community of residents and businesses,
with 62 recognized civic and homeowners
associations and 49 commission advisory boards.
The City Commission relies heavily on their
participation in the public policy process that
enhances the quality of life for our communities.
The work and services in this area are aligned to
help our neighborhoods be healthy, strong and
stable.
With the goal of being an inclusive community
made up of distinct, complementary and
diverse neighborhoods, the City Commission is
also committed to ensuring that no one neighborhood is left behind. This requires both effective code
enforcement and investments in community aesthetics and features. Our Neighborhood Community
Investment Program participates in the beautification and enhancement of our city neighborhoods. Our
Community Redevelopment Areas target much needed improvements in the Beach and in the
Northwest area of the City. Recent updates to our zoning regulation will allow urban gardens as a
neighborhood enhancement providing opportunities for access to fresh local grown food, community
pride and participation, and to promote healthy living.
Projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of the Neighborhood Enhancement cylinder of
excellence include:










2014 BCIP 13TH Street Alliance - $22,500
2014 BCIP Fort Lauderdale Beach Village - $22,500
2014 NCIP Bal Harbor Lighting for Entranceway - $10,000
2014 NCIP Coral Ridge NE 13 Street - $17,000
2014 NCIP Croissant Park Trees - $4,600
2014 NCIP Golden Heights Speed Humps - $16,000
2014 NCIP Harbordale Landscape Median - $8,000
2014 NCIP Lake Aire Decorative Street Post/Signs - $35,000
2014 NCIP Lake Ridge Trees - $35,000

234 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget













2014 NCIP Lauderdale Manors Decorative Street - $35,000
2014 NCIP Melrose Park Entranceway Monument - $35,000
2014 NCIP Middle River Terrace Dixie Hwy - $35,000
2014 NCIP Palm Aire Wall - $35,000
2014 NCIP Poinsettia Heights Solar Lights for Entranceway - $18,000
2014 NCIP River Gardens Perimeter Privacy Wall - $35,000
2014 NCIP Shady Banks Hortt Park Tennis Court - $35,000
2014 NCIP South Middle River Sidewalk On NW 16 Street - $35,000
Community Initiatives Projects - $100,000
NPF CRA Street Improvement Grant - $600,000
NW Neighborhood Pedestrian Pathway Improvements Phase 2 & 3 - $1,060,000

FY 2014 Neighborhood Enhancement CIP Projects: $2,193,600

PUBLIC PLACES
Great cites worldwide have great public
places, from a small passive parks, to
grand open gathering forums, to pleasant
pathways. Fort Lauderdale is no different.
The city boasts more than five miles of
sparkling beaches and 300 miles of
coastline waterways that offer residents
and visitors premier opportunities for
recreation, relaxation and enjoyment.
The award-winning Wave Wall and
signature
beachfront
promenade
highlight our world famous coastline,
which is punctuated by an array of shops,
restaurants,
sidewalk
cafes
and
entertainment venues. With nearly 700 acres of beautiful park land, nine pools, a River Walk on the
verge of revitalization, and more than 60 unique beautiful neighborhoods, Fort Lauderdale is a great
public place.
Our public places create a sense of place, reflective of our tropical, urban lifestyle. They are where our
community comes together to enjoy simple activities such as listening to music or shopping at a farmer’s
market, or to celebrate large scale events. Arts and culture are inextricably linked to these places, and
make them expressive and inspiring. These places are where both public and private recreational
programming can be held for all ages, and directly influence community health and activity levels.
The City of Fort Lauderdale strives to be a City with safe, clean, and interconnected Public Places. This
Cylinder of Excellence overlaps with Infrastructure by focusing on easy accessibility to parks and public
places, through increasing connectivity through mass transit, greenways and blueways. The City also
strives to leverage private developments to ensure thoughtful and positive benefits to the public realm.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 235

Projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of the Public Places cylinder of excellence include:














Bass Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
Downtown Walkability Project- $500,000
Flamingo Park Playground Replacement - $50,000
Intracoastal Promenade/Marina Expansion - $500,000
Imperial Point Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
Las Olas Blvd. Corridor Improvements - $500,000
Palm Aire Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
Peney Park Playground Replacement - $50,000
Riverside Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
Snyder Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
Sebastian St./Alhambra St. Parking Garage - $2,137,000
Virginia Young Park Playground Replacement - $100,000
War Memorial Auditorium Air Handler Units - $180,000

FY 2014 Public Places CIP Projects: $4,517,000

PUBLIC SAFETY
One of the most important and essential roles of government is public safety. We must be a safer city
for all neighbors, including our daily commuters, visitors, and tourists. Vibrant and walkable public
places must be and feel safe. Public safety spurs business development and neighborhood enhancement
by attracting and retaining businesses and their families. Routine policing and strategic initiatives, such
as crime prevention meetings, Intelligent Led Policing, Neighborhood Action Teams, and education help
reduce crime.
The City is committed to saving life and property through rapid, effective, and specialized response.
Spanning advanced medical programs, fire and accident response, and ocean rescue, fire rescue is a
constant presence and service. The City must also be well-prepared for and responsive to all hazards to
reduce the risk to neighbors and critical assets from hazards storms, flooding and fire. Moving forward,
climate change concerns and risks must be integrated into emergency management planning. Neighbor
partnerships, such as the Community Emergency Response Teams, help strengthen community
preparedness and response.
There are no new projects approved for funding in FY 2014 in support of this cylinder of excellence.
We are in the process of building three (3) new Fire Rescue Stations.

236 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

The table below provides definitions of abbreviations of department names that are used in the capital
funding schedules that follow.

Abbreviation
PARKS
TAM
PW
ITS
FIN
DSD
FIRE
POLICE

Department
Parks and Recreation Department
Transportation and Mobility Department
Public Works Department
Information Technology Services Department
Finance Department
Sustainable Development Department
Fire-Rescue Department
Police Department

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 237

238 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

2014 NCIP POINSETTIA HEIGHTS SOLAR LIGHTS FOR
ENTRANCEWAY
2014 NCIP CORAL RIDGE NE 13 STREET
2014 NCIP BAL HARBOUR LIGHTING FOR ENTRANCEWAY

Project Title

CARTER PARK RENOVATIONS
NE 13TH STREET (PHASE 1) CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT
SW 27TH AVENUE CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
RIVERWALK DISTRICT PLAN: SMOKER PARK
NCIP/BCIP PROJECT COMMUNITY MATCH CDBG FUNDS

NE 15 AVENUE CORRIDOR SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
2014 BCIP 13TH STREET ALLIANCE
2014 NCIP GOLDEN HEIGHTS SPEED HUMPS
2014 NCIP LAKE AIRE DECORATIVE STREET POST/SIGNS E

2014 NCIP LAUDERDALE MANORS DECORATIVE STREET
SIGN
2014 NCIP MIDDLE RIVER TERRACE DIXIE HWY
IMPROVEME
2014 NCIP PALM AIRE WALL
2014 NCIP RIVER GARDENS PERIMETER PRIVACY WALL

P11227
FY20140055
FY20140056
FY20120109
Various

FY20110063
P11954
P11959
P11962

P11963

2014 NCIP SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER SIDEWALK ON NW 16
STR
FY20080110 NW 19th STREET CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
FY20140053 NW 7TH AVENUE CORRIDOR PROJECT
Fund 108 CDBG Total

P11960

P11966
P11956

P11965

2011 NCIP SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER SIDEWALK
2011 NCIP RIVERSIDE PRK CURBING & SWALES
2011 NCIP PROGRESSO VILL DECOR STR SIGNS
NW GARDENS STREETSCAPE ENHANCEMENTS
DORSEY RIVERBEND ASPHALT CRA
NW 19 AVE SIDEWALKS
SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER UNPAVED ROADWAYS
RIVERWALK DIST. PLAN: ESPLANADE PK & RIVER BASIN

P11695
P11699
P11703
P11739
P11913
P11910
P11786
FY20120111

Community Development Block Grant

P11949
2014 NCIP HARBORDALE LANDSCAPE MEDIAN
Community Cash Match (000) Total

P11947
P11948

P11946

Community Cash Match

Project
Number

$

$

-

-

-

424,100

151,150

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

424,100
-

2,000
41,500

17,000
10,000

12,500

FY 2014*

-

-

29,980
3,279
2,788
39,582
478
7,441
67,603
-

-

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

500,000

-

-

-

-

-

75,000
-

425,000

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

500,000

-

-

-

-

-

60,000
310,000
130,000
-

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

-

487,500

-

-

-

-

-

115,000
280,000
92,500

FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

500,000

-

-

-

-

500,000
-

FY 2018

2,562,750

-

-

-

-

500,000
-

250,000
310,000
130,000
280,000
92,500

29,980
3,279
2,788
39,582
478
7,441
491,703
425,000

2,000
41,500

17,000
10,000

12,500

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

-

-

-

3,370,000
329,000
3,947,500

35,000

35,000
35,000

35,000

35,000

22,500
16,000
35,000

Unfunded
Needs

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 239

P10257
P10435
P10448
P10737
P10742
P10777
P10904
P11056
P11183
P11193
P11194
P11305
P11331
P11353
P11402
P11411
P11418
P11422
P11486
P11491
P11498
P11580
P11597
P11673
P11808
P1809
P11810
P1811
P16004
P09295
P11671
P11670
11485
P11896
P11918
P16003
P16014
P16026
P16029
P16048

Grants Fund

Project
Number

RIVERSIDE PARK IMPROVEMENTS
DORSEY RIVERBEND IMPROVEMENTS
6 ST/SISTRUNK STREETSCAPE & ENHANCEMENTS
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT SE 15TH AVE
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT HARBORAGE PKWY
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
SAILBOAT BEND PRESERVE PROJECT
CYPRESS CREEK SAND PINE PARK
BILL KEITH PRESERVE
FLAGER DR GREENWAY & BICYCLE FACILITY
SR - 838 / SUNRISE BOULEVARD LANDSCAPING
FLAGER HEIGHTS PARK
COMMERCIAL BLVD LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
RIVER OAKS/ GORE PARK IMPROVEMENTS
HAZARD MITIGATION - WIND RETROFIT PJT
TARPON BEND PARK
HORTT PROPERTY ACQUISITION/ IMPROVEMENTS
SE 15TH ST BOAT LAUNCH & MARINE COMPLEX
PROGRESSO NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT
NE 15 AVE - MEDIAN LANDSCAPING
A1A SEABREEZE BLVD TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS
HARBORDALE ELEM SIDEWALKS PHASE 2
HARBORDALE ELEMENTARY SIDEWALK CONSTRUCT
NW 24TH AVE SIDEWALKS
CORAL RIDGE PARK - PHASE II 12
RIVER OAKS/ GORE PARK IMP. 12
SOUTH S SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION 12
MILLS POND PARK PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT 12
FLOYD HULL
NORTHWEST 7TH/9TH AVENUE CONNECTOR
LAS OLAS MARINA & AQUATIC COMPLEX DREDGING
NEW BAHIA MAR DREDGING
NW NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENTS
A1A 17TH ST CAUSEWAY TO MAYAN DRIVE
RIVERMONT PARK
LAS OLAS MARINA
POLICE STATION
CARTER PARK
HOLIDAY PARK
SWIMMING HALL OF FAME

Project Title

20,671
36,547
62,434
310,180
718,877
16,807
70,021
247,702
45,161
24,087
14,263
7,116
81,952
75,000
417,851
475,000
75,000
2,265,177
300,000
17,936
109,189
15,771
20,655
72,590
75,000
75,000
150,000
75,000
3,742
681,253
36,163
111,350
300,000
179,920
200,000
13,525
22,764
28,819
15,581
80,961

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
2,468,000
1,969,000
1,268,000
-

258,898
206,543
-

FY 2015

-

FY 2014*

FY 2016

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

330,000
-

FY 2017

FY 2018

-

-

20,671
36,547
62,434
310,180
718,877
16,807
70,021
247,702
45,161
24,087
14,263
7,116
81,952
75,000
417,851
475,000
75,000
2,265,177
300,000
17,936
109,189
15,771
20,655
72,590
75,000
75,000
150,000
75,000
3,742
1,011,253
2,763,061
2,286,893
1,568,000
179,920
200,000
13,525
22,764
28,819
15,581
80,961

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

2,000,000
-

Unfunded
Needs

240 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget
$

$

$

P10501
MID-TOWN PROPERTY ACQUISITION
Fund 322 Tax Increment Rev Const 2004 Total

P10777
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
P11722
RIVERWALK SEAWALL REPLACEMENT NORTHSIDE
Fund 328 FIFC Loan Construction 2002 Total

FIFC Loan Construction Fund 2002

Tax Increment Rev Const 2004 Amt

P10448
6 ST/SISTRUNK STREETSCAPE & ENHANCEMENTS
P10538
MIDTOWN OFF STREET PARKING
P11486
PROGRESSO NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT
Fund 320 Tax Increment Rev Const 2004 Total

Tax Increment Rev Const 2004 Non-Amt

Fund 319 Special Assessments Fund Total

FY20140067

P11715
P11716
FY20140069

BRIDGESIDE SQUARE AREA IMPROVEMENTS
NE 33RD AVENUE/DOLPHIN ISLES IMPROVEMENT
IDLEWYLD/RIVIERA ISLES UNDERGROUNDING OF
UTILITIES
LAS OLAS ISLES UNDERGROUNDING UTILITIES
SEVEN ISLES UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
UNDERGROUNDING SPECIAL ASSESSMENT - HARBOR
BEACH
UNDERGROUNDING SPECIAL ASSESSMENT - SUNRISE KEY

Special Assessments

P09733
P10247
P11714

$

$

P11919
ONESOLUTION UPGRADE
Fund 142 Building Technology Total

Building Technology Fund

$

SIX REPLACEMENT TROLLEYS FOR COMMUNITY BUS
BAYVIEW DRIVE BIKE/PEDESTRIAN PROJECT
ELECTRICAL IMPROVEMENTS NEW RIVER
LAS OLAS BOULEVARD SAFETY PROJECT
LAS OLAS INTRACOASTAL PROMENADE / MARINA
EXPANSION
NE 13TH STREET (PHASE 1) CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT

Project Title

10427
NEW RIVER PUMPOUT FACILITIES RENOVATIONS
FY20140053 NW 7TH AVENUE CORRIDOR PROJECT
11419
RIVER OAKS PRESERVE
FY20140056 SW 27TH AVENUE CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
Fund 129 Grants Total

FY20140055

P11950
FY20140054
11065
11136
11677

Project
Number

-

-

22,750
266,708
289,458

47,177
47,177

411,709
276,729
294,235
982,673

55,367

-

1,785
1,629
-

17,585
32,286
2,082

441,000
441,000

7,549,064

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1,955,481

-

1,490,040
-

FY 2014*

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5,705,000

FY 2015

FY 2016

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

330,000

FY 2017

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

22,750
266,708
289,458

47,177
47,177

411,709
276,729
294,235
982,673

55,367

-

1,785
1,629
-

17,585
32,286
2,082

441,000
441,000

15,539,545

-

1,490,040
-

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

-

39,859,847

3,200,000

10,086,612
9,162,903
9,200,000

8,210,332

-

1,210,680
1,000,000
1,100,000
870,000
20,019,076

1,300,000

1,000,000
700,000
3,000,000
7,838,396

Unfunded
Needs

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 241

P11096
P11099
P11098
P11386
P11500
P11510
P11503
P11517
P11513
P11514
P11516
P11518
P11515
P11509
P11511
P11507
P11599
P11604
P11606
P11607
P11602
P11609
P11614
P11608
P11600
P11610
P11605
P11601
P11603
P11694
P11702
P11701
P11699
P11691
P11805
P11803
P11819
P11797
P11799
P11788
P11794

Project Title

2005-06 NCIP FLAGLER TRIANGLE MEDIAN
2005-06 NCIP PALM AIRE PRIVACY WALL
2005-06 NCIP RIVER GARDENS SIGNS/IRRIGAT
2008 NCIP CORAL RIDGE CNTRY CLUB ESTATES
2009 BCIP LAS OLAS ASSOCIATION - MEDIAN
2009 NCIGP HARBOR BEACH HOA
2009 NCIP COUNCIL OF FTL CIVIC ASSOC
2009 NCIP DILLARD PARK HOA ENTRY SIGNS
2009 NCIP GOLDEN HEIGHTS HOA
2009 NCIP HARBORDALE CIVIC ASSOCIATION
2009 NCIP LAKE RIDGE CIVIC ASSOCIATION
2009 NCIP LAUDERDALE MANORS HOA
2009 NCIP POINCIANA PARK CIVIC ASSOCIATN
2009 NCIP PROGRESSO VILLAGE CIVIC ASSOC
2009 NCIP SAILBOAT BEND CIVIC ASSOCIATN
2009 NCIP SEVEN ISLES HOA BRIDGE IMPROVM
2010 NCIP BAL HARBOUR ENTRANCE ISLAND
2010 NCIP COLEE HAMMOCK ENTRYWAY SIGNS
2010 NCIP CORAL RIDGE DECOR STR SIGNS
2010 NCIP DILLARD PARK CURBING
2010 NCIP DOWNTOWN WAYFINDING SIGNAGE
2010 NCIP LAKE RIDGE ENTRYWAY SIGNAGE
2010 NCIP PROGRESSO VILLAGE DEC ST SIGNS
2010 NCIP RIVER GARDEN/ SWEETING MONUMEN
2010 NCIP RIVERSIDE PARK CURBS AND SWALE
2010 NCIP ROCK ISLAND DECOR STREET SIGNS
2010 NCIP SEVEN ISLES ASPHALT BRIDGES
2010 NCIP SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER STR SIGNS
2010 NCIP THE LANDINGS BRIDGE SIGNAGE
2011 NCIP BAL HARBOUR DEC ST POST/LIGHTS
2011 NCIP DILLARD PRK SIDEWALK & CURBING
2011 NCIP RIVER OAKS SIDEWLK @ SW 15 AVE
2011 NCIP RIVERSIDE PRK CURBING & SWALES
2011 NCIP VICTORIA PRK DECOR STR POSTS
2012 BCIP 13TH ST SOLAR STREET LIGHTS
2012 BCIP FAT VILLAGE
2012 BCIP FTL BEACH VILLAGE MERCHANTS
2012 NCIP DILLARD PARK CURBING
2012 NCIP GOLDEN HEIGHTS ENTRANCE PAVERS
2012 NCIP IMPERIAL POINT STREET POSTS
2012 NCIP LAKE AIRE ST LIGHTS & POSTS

General Capital Projects Fund

Project
Number
9,670
35,000
22,856
10,607
22,500
11,620
2,283
25,083
32,404
226
9,764
3,014
17,853
28,220
30,000
27,209
9,465
534
6,198
35,000
35,000
35,000
22,500
33,520
31,668
126
35,000
8,495
1,596
8,383
35,000
70,000
31,641
13,022
22,500
22,500
22,500
35,000
35,000
36,995
35,000

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
FY 2014*

-

FY 2015

-

FY 2016

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

FY 2018

-

9,670
35,000
22,856
10,607
22,500
11,620
2,283
25,083
32,404
226
9,764
3,014
17,853
28,220
30,000
27,209
9,465
534
6,198
35,000
35,000
35,000
22,500
33,520
31,668
126
35,000
8,495
1,596
8,383
35,000
70,000
31,641
13,022
22,500
22,500
22,500
35,000
35,000
36,995
35,000

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs
-

242 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

P11800
P11802
P11790
P11795
P11798
P11792
P11801
P11796
P11793
P11789
P11791
P11520
P10720
P11425
P11729
P11650
P11826
P11628
P10932
P11530
P10742
P11157
P11295
P11331
P11762
P11478
P11727
P11724
P11725
P11834
P10867
P11305
P11818
P16004
P11118
P11244
P11212
P11746
P11633
P11840
P11580
P11597

Project
Number

2012 NCIP LAKE RIDGE TREES
2012 NCIP LAUDERDALE MANORS CROSSWALKS
2012 NCIP MELROSE PK ENTRYWAY MONUMENTS
2012 NCIP MIDDLE RVR TERR DIXIE HWY IMPR
2012 NCIP OAK RIVER SECURITY ENTRANCE
2012 NCIP RIVERLAND BRICK PAVER CROSSWLK
2012 NCIP ROCK ISLAND ST SIGN POSTS
2012 NCIP RVR GARDEN SWEETING PK IMPROVE
2012 NCIP S MIDDLE RVR ENTRYWAY MONUMENT
2012 NCIP SHADY BANKS - HORTT PARK IMPRO
2012 NCIP VICTORIA PARK CROSSWALK
800 MHZ PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO RECONFIGURAT
ADA SETTLEMENT GENERAL FUND BUILDINGS
ANNUAL DREDGING 2010-2011
ANNUAL DREDGING 2012/ 13
ANNUAL MARINE FACILITIES & SEAWALL 10/11
BASEBALL FIELDS FOR OSSWALD PARK
BASS PARK POOL RENOVATIONS
BCIP FLAGER VILLAGE IMPROVEMENTS 2004/05
BRIDGE REPAIRS AT SEVERAL LOCATIONS
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT HARBORAGE PKWY
CITY HALL SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS
CITYWIDE MESH SECURITY CAMERA SYSTEM
COMMERCIAL BLVD LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
CONCRETE AND PAVER MAINTENANCE 2011/12
COOLEY'S LANDING MAINTENANCE BUILDING
DISTRICT FOUR PARK
DISTRICT ONE PARK
DISTRICT TWO PARK
EAST LAS OLAS DECORATIVE RAILING
FIRE RESCUE MEDICAL USA SYSTEM (MEDUSA)
FLAGER HEIGHTS PARK
FLAGLER DRIVE GREENWAY PHASE 2
FLOYD HULL
FUEL STORAGE TANK REMOVAL & REPLACEMENT
GALT OCEAN SHOPPES ENTRYWAY IMP BCIP
GALT OCEAN SHOPS ENTRANCEWAY
GEORGE ENGLISH PK PLAYGROUND RENOVATIONS
GREEN EDUCATION CENTER HOLIDAY PARK
GUTHRIE BLAKE PARK
HARBORDALE ELEM SIDEWALKS PHASE 2
HARBORDALE ELEMENTARY SIDEWALK CONSTRUCT

Project Title
35,000
25,000
35,000
35,000
9,000
32,203
35,000
35,000
30,000
3,956
8,000
473,024
300
303,370
241,973
13,218
278,364
59,251
25,000
361,011
12,495
55,093
69,535
4,711
9,698
49,154
76,318
895
110,762
70,801
98
3,130
34,848
38
93
12,681
16,000
403
73
4,775
23,264
18,115

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
FY 2014*
-

FY 2015
-

FY 2016
-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017
-

FY 2018
-

35,000
25,000
35,000
35,000
9,000
32,203
35,000
35,000
30,000
3,956
8,000
473,024
300
303,370
241,973
13,218
278,364
59,251
25,000
361,011
12,495
55,093
69,535
4,711
9,698
49,154
76,318
895
110,762
70,801
98
3,130
34,848
38
93
12,681
16,000
403
73
4,775
23,264
18,115

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs
-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 243

P11947

P11534
P11734
P11632
P11252
P11422
P11688
P11821
P10777
P11924
P10969
P11411
P11764
P11445
P11838
P11945
P11762
P11952
P11953
P11954
P11955
P11948

P11712

P11745
P11402
P11912
P11074
P11418
P16057
P11839
P11850
P11763
P11709
P11482
P10202
P09295
P11673
P11744
P11306
P11846

Project
Number

2014 NCIP CORAL RIDGE NE 13 STREET

RADIO COMMUNICATION MICROWAVE REPLACEMENT
RECORDS CENTER SECURITY/BULLETPROOF
RIVER OAKS DEVELOPER TRAFFIC MITIGATION
RIVIERA ISLES UTILITIES UNDERGROUNDING
ROCK ISLAND ENTRYWAY IMPROVEMENT NCIP
SE 15TH ST BOAT LAUNCH & MARINE COMPLEX
SHIRLEY SMALL PARK PAVILLION
SMOKER PK, NRTH RIVERWALK & ESPLANADE PK
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
STRANAHAN PARK FENCE
SW 26TH STREET CLOSURE
TARPON BEND PARK
TOP OF TUNNEL NORTH EXTENSION
TWIN LAKES PARK
WALKER PARK PLAYGROUNG
ANNUAL ASPHALTIC CONCRETE RESURFACING
SIDEWALK AND PAVER REPLACEMENT
BRIDGES MASTER PLAN
DOWNTOWN WALKABILITY PROJECT
2014 BCIP 13TH STREET ALLIANCE
2014 BCIP FORT LAUDERDALE BEACH VILLAGE
2014 NCIP BAL HARBOUR LIGHTING FOR ENTRANCEWAY

HARDY PARK FIELD RENOVATION
HAZARD MITIGATION - WIND RETROFIT PJT
HOLIDAY PARK GYM ROOF
HOLIDAY PARK MAINTENANCE FACILITY
HORTT PROPERTY ACQUISITION/ IMPROVEMENTS
LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENTS
LAUDERDALE MANORS PLAYGROUND
MARINE FACILITIES SEAWALL & BUOY 2012-13
MARSHALL'S POINT BRIDGE NOISE MITIGATION
MELROSE PARK IMPROVEMENTS
MILLS POND PARK IMPROVEMENTS
NCIP HARBOR BEACH
NORTHWEST 7/9 AVENUE CONNECTOR
NW 24TH AVE SIDEWALKS
OCEAN REGULATORY BUOYS & SIGNS 2013-14
OSSWALD PARK
PAVEMENT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE SYSTEM

Project Title

-

708,760
34,030
39,112
1,050
28,618
1,695
396
31,354
111,480
85,000
2,500
118,262
99,991
423
50,842
-

14,489
174,656
44,132
1,758
1,692
45,387
106,300
283,970
151,991
8,506
188,906
67,664
94,654
19,098
106,027
158
97,896

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
-

17,000

470,000
780,000
250,000
500,000
22,500
22,500
10,000

FY 2014*

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

-

-

-

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

17,000

708,760
34,030
39,112
1,050
28,618
1,695
396
31,354
111,480
85,000
2,500
118,262
99,991
423
50,842
470,000
780,000
250,000
500,000
22,500
22,500
10,000

14,489
174,656
44,132
1,758
1,692
45,387
106,300
283,970
151,991
8,506
188,906
67,664
94,654
19,098
106,027
158
97,896

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

244 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

2014 NCIP LAUDERDALE MANORS DECORATIVE STREET
SIGN
2014 NCIP MELROSE PARK ENTRYWAY MONUMENT
2014 NCIP MIDDLE RIVER TERRACE DIXIE HWY
IMPROVEMENTS
2014 NCIP PALM AIRE WALL
2014 NCIP POINSETTIA HEIGHTS SOLAR LIGHTS FOR
ENTRYWAY
2014 NCIP RIVER GARDENS PERIMETER PRIVACY WALL

P11963

-

WAR MEMORIAL AUDITORIUM ROOF REPLACEMENT

P11984
P11985

P11983

P11982

P11981

OSSWALD PARK ACTIVITY CENTER ROOF REPLACEMENT
PARKS AND REC ADMIN ROOF REPLACEMENT
ESPLANADE RESTROOM ROOF REPLACEMENT

FLOYD HULL MORTON CENTER ROOF REPLACEMENT
CITY HALL ROOF REPLACEMENT

-

P11967
P11968
P11969
P11970
P11971
P11972
P11973
P11974
P11975
P11976
P11977
P11978
P11951
P11979
P11980

-

-

-

2014 NCIP SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER SIDEWALK ON NW 16
STREET
WAR MEMORIAL AUDITORIUM AIR HANDLER UNITS
SEVEN ISLES SEAWALL IMPROVEMENTS
IMPERIAL POINT PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
RIVERSIDE PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
SNYDER PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
BASS PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
PALM AIRE PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
FLAMINGO PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
PENEY PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
VIRGINIA YOUNG PARK PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
SNYDER PARK RESTROOMS SEWER PIPE REPAIR
SOUTH BEACH RESTROOM RENOVATIONS
MORTON CENTER SEWER PIPE REPAIR
ESPLANADE RESTROOM REPAIRS/RENNOVATIONS

P11960

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2014 NCIP SHADY BANKS HORTT PARK TENNIS COURT

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

P11957

P11956

P11966
P11946

P11964
P11965

P11962

2014 NCIP CROISSANT PARK TREES
2014 NCIP GOLDEN HEIGHTS SPEED HUMPS
2014 NCIP HARBORDALE LANDSCAPE MEDIAN
2014 NCIP LAKE AIRE DECORATIVE STREET POST/SIGNS
ENTRYWAY
2014 NCIP LAKE RIDGE TREES

Project Title

P11958
P11959
P11949
P11961

Project
Number

75,000
40,000
15,900

50,375
524,600

395,000

180,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
50,000
50,000
100,000
30,000
120,000
25,000
120,000

35,000

35,000

35,000

35,000
18,000

35,000
35,000

35,000

35,000

4,600
16,000
8,000
35,000

FY 2014*

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2016

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

75,000
40,000
15,900

50,375
524,600

395,000

180,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
50,000
50,000
100,000
30,000
120,000
25,000
120,000

35,000

35,000

35,000

35,000
18,000

35,000
35,000

35,000

35,000

4,600
16,000
8,000
35,000

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 245

FY20140034

FY20130199
11034
FY20100180
11907
FY20140037
FY20080179
FY20080031

11214

FY20080007
10427
FY20130246
FY20080169
FY20130184
FY20130190
FY20130162

FY20120130

FY20140054
FY20110072
FY20140042

BROWARD BOULEVARD CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
CROISSANT PARK BALL FIELD RENOVATIONS
NEW RIVER PUMPOUT FACILITIES RENOVATIONS
ENTRANCEWAY SIGNAGE
POLICE HEADQUARTERS AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
ANNIE BECK PARK IMPROVEMENTS
PUBLIC SAFETY TRAINING FACILITY
FORT LAUDERDALE BEACH PARK RENOVATIONS
WAR MEMORIAL STAGE ELECTRIC AND STAGE RIGGING
REPL
CITY HALL ELEVATOR MODERNIZATION
MARINE FACILITIES AND MOORING BUOYS
POLICE HEADQUARTERS ROOF REPLACEMENT
ANNUAL DREDGING 2014
POLICE MARINE PATROL VESSELS
POLICE HEADQUARTERS REPLACEMENT
FLOYD HULL PARK RENOVATIONS
POLICE HEADQUARTERS SECURITY DOOR CARD READER
SYSTEM

BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT WEST LAKE DRIVE/MERCEDES
RIVER
BAYVIEW DRIVE BIKE/PEDESTRIAN PROJECT
GALT OCEAN MILE SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT
HIGH MAST LIGHTING SYSTEM COMMERCIAL BLVD.

10739

FY20120110

SE/SW 6 STREET CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
NEW RIVERWALK IMPROVEMENTS
FIRE BOAT REPLACEMENT
EAST LAS OLAS STREET LIGHTS
SELF CONTAINED BREATHING APPARATUS (SCBA)
REHABILITATE RIVERHOUSE
ELECTRICAL IMPROVEMENTS NEW RIVER
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT COCONUT ISLE
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT LAGUNA TERRACE
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT SOUTH OCEAN DRIVE
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT NE 42ND STREET
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT NE 41ST STREET
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT E. LAS OLAS BOULEVARD
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT WEST LAKE DRIVE/LAKE
LUCILLE
RIVERWALK DISTRICT PLAN: ANDREWS AVENUE BRIDGE

Project Title

FY20120131
FY20080069
FY20140096
FY20130233
FY20140094
FY20110043
11065
FY20140073
10740
10741
10743
10744
10796
10797

Project
Number

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014*

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2,700,000
-

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

-

-

300,000
1,000,000
850,000
500,000
-

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

-

-

-

1,700,000
-

FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

1,494,000
700,000
-

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

-

-

3,000,000
1,000,000
850,000
500,000
1,700,000
1,494,000
700,000
-

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

205,000

1,400,000
1,150,000
3,000,000
592,000
2,620,000
1,280,000
78,000,000
1,225,000

630,000
800,000
955,107
1,000,000
1,054,900
68,940
4,146,000
1,000,000

140,000
800,000
150,000

3,500,000

1,001,000

3,000,000
414,226
2,000,000
2,510,000
3,000,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
4,000,000
4,065,000

Unfunded
Needs

246 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY20110005

FY20100238
FY20140020
FY20140035
FY20120093
FY20140040
FY20140084
FY20140022
FY20130201
FY20130202
FY20130230
FY20110036

11216

FY20080181

FY20120094
FY20120108
FY20080068

FY20090029

FY20090017
FY20080048
FY20140013
11908

FY20140029

FY20140036
11082
FY20140099
FY20140097
FY20140044
FY20080071

FY20090022

FY20140031
FY20130188
FY20110033
11643
FY20100181

Project
Number

WAR MEMORIAL BACK PARKING LOT RESURFACING	
	
NEW RIVERLAND PARK SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER
SWEETING PARK DOCK/FISHING PIER
POLICE HEADQUARTERS OFFICE REORGANIZATION
NEW HOLIDAY PARK RACQUETBALL COURTS
RIVERSIDE PARK RESTROOMS
ISLE OF PALMS SEAWALL IMPROVEMENTS
CARTER PARK ENERGY EFFICIENT ESCO
CITY HALL - ENERGY EFFICIENT RETROFIT ESCO
FIVE ASH / 38TH ST PW UTILITIES ADMIN - ESCO
HOLIDAY PARK ENERGY SAVINGS (ESCO)
MIDDLE RIVER TERRACE - DIXIE HWY CORRIDOR
IMPROVEMENTS
MILLS POND PARKING, LAKE SIDE & NW FIELD LIGHTS
ESCO

SHADE OVER HOLIDAY PARK BASEBALL FIELD BLEACHERS
BASS PARK POOL BUILDING RENOVATION
NEW SHIRLEY SMALL PARK COMMUNITY CENTER
LAURA WARD PLAZA UPGRADES
FEC & CSX RAILROAD CROSSING REHABILITATION
WAR MEMORIAL AUDITORIUM SEATING SYSTEM
REPLACEMENT
NEW OSSWALD GOLF COURSE LIGHTS
PROPERTY PURCHASE WAVERLY ROAD
NEW RIVERLAND MULTIPURPOSE FIELD LIGHTING
PARKS COMPOUND BUILDING RENOVATIONS - SW 14
AVE

NEW DEGRAFFENREIDT COMMUNITY CENTER/BASS PARK
POLICE MOBILE COMMAND VEHICLE
NEW MILLS POND IMPROVEMENTS
AIRCONDITIONING FIRE STATION #2
FIELD CONVERSION HOLIDAY PARK
SNYDER PARK DOCK & RAMP
SNYDER PARK IMPROVEMENTS

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

POLICE INDOOR GUN RANGE

GEORGE ENGLISH PARK BOAT RAMP RENOVATIONS
POLICE OUTDOOR GUN RANGE
NEW RIVER BOAT CROSSING & PAVILION
POLICE HEADQUARTERS ELEVATOR REPLACEMENTS

Project Title

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
FY 2014*
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2015
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2016

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2018
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

502,250

195,000
1,500,000
80,000
1,447,875
728,483
152,400
800,000
505,000
745,000
350,000
6,261,000
1,500,000

590,000

625,000
558,000
1,300,800
497,250

250,000
1,600,000
2,000,000
125,000
1,000,000

3,150,000
880,000
500,600
375,000
1,500,000
130,000
1,500,000

165,000
1,078,016
750,000
300,000

1,200,000

Unfunded
Needs

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 247

MIZELL CENTER - ENERGY EFFICIENT RETROFIT ESCO
NEW STRANAHAN LIGHTING
NEW WARFIELD PARK IMPROVEMENTS
NEW WATER SPRAY PARKS
OSSWALD ACTIVITY CENTER - ENERGY ESCO
PARKS & RECREATION ADMIN - ENERGY EFFICIENT ESCO

POLICE DEPARTMENT - ENERGY EFFICIENT RETROFIT
ESCO
ROOF REPLACEMENTS - ESCO
SPORTS FIELD & GARAGE LIGHTING - ENERGY EFFICIENT

FY20130200
FY20130198
FY20080074
FY20080075
FY20130205
FY20130207

FY20130203

$

$

$

P10777
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
P11761
ANNUAL ASPHALTIC CONTRETE RESURF 2012-13
P11945
ANNUAL ASPHALTIC CONTRETE RESURFACING
11762
SIDEWALK AND PAVER REPLACEMENT
Fund 332 Gas Tax Fund Total

P11368
TEMPORARY FIRE STATION 49
P11024
NEW FIRE STATIONS SHARED PROJECT COSTS
P10912
FIRE STATION 49 DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION
P11892
TEMPORARY FIRE STATION 54
P10919
NEW FIRE STATION 35
P10911
FIRE STATION 46 DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION
P10909
SE FIRE STATION DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION
P10918
NEW FIRE STATION 13
P10914
NEW FIRE STATION 54
Fund 336 Fire Rescue Bond 2005 Series Total

P10777
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
P16004
FLOYD HULL
Fund 340 GOB Construction Fund 1997 Total

GOB Construction Fund 1997

Fire Rescue Bond 2005 Series

Gas Tax

$

FY20130234 SUNRISE INTRACOASTAL - STREET LIGHT WIRING
Fund 331 CIP General Fund Total

FY20080185
FY20130201

Project Title

Project
Number

-

-

-

3,681
8,686
12,367

6,782
8,050
55,370
219,747
512,849
1,427,536
2,087,795
3,894,389
4,117,740
12,330,258

92,979
1,296,474
140,973
1,530,426

6,242,402

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

-

-

730,000
730,000

4,809,475

FY 2014*

-

-

-

-

-

720,000
720,000

2,700,000

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

-

710,000
710,000

2,650,000

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

-

-

700,000
700,000

1,700,000

FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

700,000
700,000

2,194,000

FY 2018

-

-

-

3,681
8,686
12,367

6,782
8,050
55,370
219,747
512,849
1,427,536
2,087,795
3,894,389
4,117,740
12,330,258

92,979
1,296,474
3,560,000
140,973
5,090,426

20,295,877

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

320,000
320,000

200,000
177,635,627

2,524,825
9,380,100

800,000

400,000
110,500
606,355
900,000
40,000
125,000

Unfunded
Needs

248 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Project Title

$

$

P10720
ADA SETTLEMENT GENERAL FUND BUILDINGS
P11923
BAYVIEW DRIVE SIDEWALK RESTORATION
P11782
SAILBOAT BEND-NORTH-FLOATING DOCK
P11827
SEAWALL REPLACEMENT ALONG NEW RIVER
Fund 344 Excise Tax Bond Construction 1998C Total

P11600
P11708
P11707
P11705
P11696
P11694
P11692
P11700
P11690
P11698
P11697
P11703
P11695
P11650
P11650
P11826
P11530
P11807
P11815
P11305
P11912

2010 NCIP RIVERSIDE PARK CURBS AND SWALE
2011 BCIP 13TH ST ALLIANCE LIGHTING
2011 BCIP 17 ST ALLIANCE WAYFND SIGNAGE
2011 BCIP MIDTWN BUS ASN WAYFND SGN & TR
2011 NCIGP HARBOR BCH LANDSCAPED MEDIANS
2011 NCIP BAL HARBOUR DEC ST POST/LIGHTS
2011 NCIP BEVERLY HGTS TRAFFIC CALMING
2011 NCIP DORSEY RIVERBEND CRB & SIDEWLK
2011 NCIP MELROSE PRK LNDSCP & ENTRY SGN
2011 NCIP MIDDLE RIVER TERR DIXIE IMPROV
2011 NCIP POINCIANA PRK LNDSCP MEDIANS
2011 NCIP PROGRESSO VILL DECOR STR SIGNS
2011 NCIP SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER SIDEWALK
ANNUAL MARINE FACILITIES & SEAWALL 10/11
ANNUAL MARINE FACILITIES & SEAWALL 10/11
BASEBALL FIELDS FOR OSSWALD PARK
BRIDGE REPAIRS AT SEVERAL LOCATIONS
CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION LEGACY PROJECT
CITYWIDE TELEPHONE SYSTEM UPGRADE PH. 2
FLAGER HEIGHTS PARK
HOLIDAY PARK GYM ROOF

Special Obligation Construction 2011

Excise Tax Bond Construction 1998C

P11446
A1A NORTHERN CITY LIMIT STREETSCAPE IMP
P11498
A1A SEABREEZE BLVD TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS
P11826
BASEBALL FIELDS FOR OSSWALD PARK
P11322
BEACH IMPROVEMENTS
P11578
BEACH WALL DECORATIVE LIGHTING SYSTEM
P11418
HORTT PROPERTY ACQUISITION/ IMPROVEMENTS
P11532
LAS OLAS MEDIANS
P00001
NOT PROJECT RELATED
P11774
RIVERWALK LIGHTING
P11827
SEAWALL REPLACEMENT ALONG NEW RIVER
P10777
SOUTH SIDE SCHOOL-PURCHASE & RESTORATION
Fund 343 Special Obligation Construction 2008B Total

Special Obligation Construction 2008B

Project
Number

7,462
15,000
15,000
15,000
35,000
1,668
23,000
33,168
35,000
20,050
35,000
2,049
20,103
63,903
82,370
95,448
109,327
300,000
441,129
11,252
130,000

532,548
349,851
102,545
46,384
1,031,328

300,000
55,139
112,809
303,815
119,446
175
350,000
1,657,282
98,192
765,666
2,682,628
6,445,153

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
FY 2014*

-

-

-

FY 2015

-

-

-

FY 2016

-

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

-

-

FY 2018

-

-

-

7,462
15,000
15,000
15,000
35,000
1,668
23,000
33,168
35,000
20,050
35,000
2,049
20,103
63,903
82,370
95,448
109,327
300,000
441,129
11,252
130,000

532,548
349,851
102,545
46,384
1,031,328

300,000
55,139
112,809
303,815
119,446
175
350,000
1,657,282
98,192
765,666
2,682,628
6,445,153

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 249

Project Title

LAS OLAS BLVD CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
SR A1A STREETSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS WESTSIDE
ALMOND AVENUE STREETSCAPE
LAS OLAS MARINA & AQUATICS COMPLEX DREDGING

11900
P11681
P11676
11671

P10448
P11550
P10150
P10665
P11740
P10649
P10539
P10647
P09295
P11739
P10015
P10830
P11485

6 ST/SISTRUNK STREETSCAPE & ENHANCEMENTS
BUILDING DESIGN AND PLANNING SERVICES
BUSINESS INCENTIVES
GENERAL FACADE PROGRAM
IN FILL HOUSING CONTRIBUTIONS
MIDTOWN DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
MIDTOWN FACADE
MIDTOWN PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
NORTHWEST 7/9 AVENUE CONNECTOR
NW GARDENS STREETSCAPE ENHANCEMENTS
NW/PROGRESSO/FLAGLER HEIGHTS CRA
SISTRUNK BLVD WATERMAIN
NW NEIGHBORHOOD PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY IMPRVS

CRA - NWPFH Fund

11670
NEW BAHIA MAR DREDGING
Fund 346 CRA Beach Total

NEW AQUATICS CENTER/PARKING GARAGE
BEACH IMPROVEMENTS
BEACH WALL DECORATIVE LIGHTING SYSTEM
CENTRAL BEACH AREA CIP
OCEANSIDE PLAZA
SOUTH BEACH PLAYGROUND REPLACEMENT
LAS OLAS BEACH PLAZA
SR A1A BEACHFRONT PROMENADE
CHANNEL SQUARE
A1A SEABREEZE BLVD TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS
SEBASTIAN ST/ALHAMBRA ST PARKING GARAGE
INTRACOASTAL PROMENADE/MARINA EXPANSION

P10648
P11322
P11578
P00464
P11675
P11265
P11678
P11680
P11682
P11498
P11679
P11677

CRA Beach Fund

P10202
NCIP HARBOR BEACH
P11654
NW 19TH STREET MEDIANS
P11784
ORANGE BOWL FIELD AT CATER PARK
P10585
PALM AIRE WALL IMPROVEMENTS
P11231
RIVERWALK IMPROVEMENTS
P10904
SAILBOAT BEND PRESERVE PROJECT
P11646
WAR MEMORIAL /PARKER PLAYHOUSE MARQUEE
Fund 345 Special Obligation Construction 2011 Total

Project
Number

$

$

928,939
93,575
543,648
128,047
195,000
5,390
357,229
40,433
14,480
229,267
106,612
11,441
308,162

25,997,619

101,538
58,520
-

24,334,729
525,000
173,491
258,787
162,633
50,000
46,252
38,601
34,817
5,801
163,037
44,414

6,500
834,454
352,922
148,868
149,974
250,454
64,991
3,299,093

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013
-

1,060,000

90,461
4,035,251

500,000
350,000
250,000
207,790

2,137,000
500,000

FY 2014*
-

-

863,000
18,937,500

6,230,500
1,863,000
1,981,000

8,000,000

FY 2015

-

-

-

21,750,000

21,750,000
-

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

-

928,939
93,575
543,648
128,047
195,000
5,390
357,229
40,433
14,480
229,267
106,612
11,441
1,368,162

953,461
70,720,370

22,250,000
6,682,038
2,171,520
2,188,790

24,334,729
525,000
173,491
258,787
162,633
50,000
46,252
38,601
34,817
5,801
2,300,037
8,544,414

6,500
834,454
352,922
148,868
149,974
250,454
64,991
3,299,093

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

-

250 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget
$

$

P11849
PROPERTY PURCHASE DORSEY RIVERBEND
P11353
RIVER OAKS/ GORE PARK IMPROVEMENTS
P11538
RIVERLAND PARK PAVILION
P11918
RIVERMONT PARK
P10904
SAILBOAT BEND PRESERVE PROJECT
P11411
TARPON BEND PARK
Fund 350 Park Impact Fee Fund Total

P10536
LINCOLN PARK ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
P10950
LINCOLN PARK EXPANSION
P10894
LINCOLN PARK REMEDIATION
P00001
NOT PROJECT RELATED
P09921
TRASH TRANSFER STATION - PLANT A
P11139
UTILITY BILLING SYSTEM REPLACEMENT
P08631
WINGATE LANDFILL CLOSURE
P08848
WINGATE LANDFILL RI/FS CONSULTANT
P10098
WINGATE ROADSITE REMEDIATION AGREEMENT
Fund 409 Sanitation Fund Total

P11731
P10669
P10541
P11773
P11624
P11683
P11689
P11710
P11876
P11420
P11582
P11917
P11340
P11781

48 IN WASTEWATER PIPE EMERGENCY REPL
ADVERTISING/PERMITS/PRINTING BEFORE BIDS
G T LOHMEYER WWTP IMPROVEMENTS
GTL PLANT REHABILITATION OF PCCP PIPE
GTL 48-IN FM CONNECT AT PRETREAT BLDG
GTL BUILDING PARAPET AND ENVELOPE REPAIR
GTL DEWATERING SLUDGE FEED MIXERS REPLAC
GTL EMERGENCY GENERATOR CONNECTION
GTL GRIT CHAMBER REHAB: PRELIM DESIGN
GTL INJECTION WELL MECHANICAL TESTING
GTL PUB AD SYSTEM, LOX & CONCR IMPRV
GTL REACTOR 1 & OXYGEN BLDG MCC ELEC UPG
GTL STURCTURE & WELL IMPROVEMENTS
GTL WWTP CRYOGENIC PLANT UPGRADES

Central Region/Wastewater

Sanitation Fund

Park Impact Fees

$

Project Title

P11487
NW 9 AVENUE ENHANCEMENT PROJECT
P11986
NPF CRA STREET IMPROVEMENT GRANT
P11987
MIZELL CENTER UPGRADE
P11988
FAT VILLAGE CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
P11989
NPF CRA WIRELESS CAMERA AND WI-FI
P11990
COMMUNITY INITIATIVES PROJECTS
FY20120092 NEW CARTER PARK SENIOR CENTER
Fund 347 CRA - NWPFH Fund Total

Project
Number

217,537
52,679
178,428
522,754
2,272
234,126
352,296
491,400
298,925
13,622
1,461,225
507,500
138,666
47,995

8,809
84,410
7,278
73,997
54,900
83,883
146,158
188,842
50,753
699,029

49,970
391,183
74,961
199,972
59,687
335,526
1,111,300

2,962,223

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

800,000
600,000
300,000
295,000
300,000
100,000
3,455,000

FY 2014*

-

-

-

800,000
250,000
245,000
100,000
2,100,000
3,495,000

FY 2015

-

-

-

400,000
250,000
100,000
750,000

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

100,000
100,000

FY 2017

-

-

-

100,000
100,000

FY 2018

217,537
52,679
178,428
522,754
2,272
234,126
352,296
491,400
298,925
13,622
1,461,225
507,500
138,666
47,995

8,809
84,410
7,278
73,997
54,900
83,883
146,158
188,842
50,753
699,029

49,970
391,183
74,961
199,972
59,687
335,526
1,111,300

2,000,000
1,100,000
300,000
540,000
300,000
500,000
2,100,000
10,862,223

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 251

Project Title

P10163
P10848
P10737
P11567
P11263
P11866
P11685
P11855
P11586
P11877
P11857
P11484
P11577
P10940
P11856
P11589
P10365
P11719
P11720
P11565
P11664
P11405
P11865
P10853
P11571
P11566
P11563
P11767
P11864
P11622
P11471
P11828
P11246
P11777
P11858
P11247
P11853
P10830

PROCESS CONTROL FIVEASH/GTL/PUMP STATION
SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER N. SMALL WATER MAINS
BRIDGE REPLACEMENT AT SE 15TH AVE
PUMP ST REHABS A12, B10, B22, D37 & D45
SPECIAL COUNCIL/PROJECT LEGAL DISPUTES
DIXIE WELLFIELD
WATER MONITORING SYSTEM (SCADA)
PROSPECT WELLFIELD IMPROVEMENT R&R
C12 & 13 INTERCONNECT - BRW CTY INTRLCL
FLCC REMEDIATION ACTION PLAN
ANNUAL UTILITIES RESTORATION 2012-13
DIXIE WELLFIELD RAW WATER MAIN RPLCMNT
W/W CONVEYANCE SYS SEWER BASIN A-21
SEWER AREA 19 ANNEXED RIVERLAND W&S MNS
PEELE DIXIE R&R
FIVEASH WTP DISINFECTION IMPROVEMENTS
WATER & WASTEWATER PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
SUNRISE BVD MIDDLE RVR BDGE WM RELOC/DES
IMPERIAL POINT LARGE WATER MN - PHASE 2
CORAL RIDGE CLUB ESTATES SEWER BASIN B-1
BASIN B-6 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REHAB
NW 2ND AVE TANK & PUMP STATION REHAB
CORAL RIDGE ISLES SEWER BASIN B-13 REHAB
FLAGLER HEIGHTS SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROV
OAKLAND PARK BEACH AREA WATER MAIN
RIO VISTA SEWER BASIN D-43 REHAB
VICTORIA PARK SEWER BASIN A-19 REHAB
BASIN A-18 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REHAB
BERMUDA RIVERA SEWER BASIN B-2
SW 20 CT, SW 22 TER, SW 24 AV SML WTR MN
SHADY BANKS SMALL WM IMPROVMNT - PHASE 2
FILTERS 10, 11, 12, & 13 REHAB-FIVEASH
WATER TREATMENT PLANT REPAIR/REPLACEMENT
54" FM EMERGENCY REPAIR WITH 48" DIP
WATER & SEWER MASTER PLAN UPDATE
DISTRIBUTION & COLLECTION REPAIR/REPLACE
SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION REHAB 2012-13
SISTRUNK BLVD WATERMAIN

Water and Sewer Master Plan

P11854
REGIONAL WASTEWATER METER REPLACEMENT
P00401
REGIONAL REPLACEMENT/RECAPITALIZATION
Fund 451 Central Region/Wastewater Total

Project
Number

$
9,964
23,508
40,238
57,116
71,978
99,951
195,369
249,970
360,000
843,665
876,771
1,031,373
1,651,596
2,638,525
7,229,970
6,822,117
4,983,665
3,703,161
3,748,414
3,175,000
3,099,980
2,225,846
2,222,480
1,941,871
2,392,916
1,905,000
1,902,134
1,250,000
1,349,980
1,350,811
625,516
566,016
799,710
541,932
499,961
719,716
399,970
360,767

99,961
3,869,459
8,488,844

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

(7,229,970)
(6,822,117)
(4,983,665)
(3,703,161)
(3,648,414)
(2,902,273)
(2,827,253)
(2,000,000)
(1,949,753)
(1,941,871)
(1,892,916)
(1,632,273)
(1,629,407)
(1,250,000)
(1,077,253)
(850,811)
(625,516)
(566,016)
(549,710)
(541,932)
(499,961)
(419,716)
(399,970)
(360,767)

5,288,711
5,288,711

FY 2014*

1,000,000
6,000,000
300,000
533,201
3,500,000
2,500,000
583,172
931,834
2,000,000
2,500,000
272,727
373,915
375,516
166,000
250,000
419,716
-

5,412,268
5,412,268

FY 2015

6,000,000
-

-

5,374,109
5,374,109

FY 2017

1,500,000
15,000,000
2,750,000
386,746
931,834
2,500,000
2,000,000
299,710
-

5,425,863
5,425,863

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

5,371,436
5,371,436

FY 2018

9,964
23,508
40,238
57,116
71,978
99,951
195,369
249,970
360,000
843,665
876,771
1,031,373
1,651,596
2,638,525
2,500,000
27,000,000
300,000
633,201
3,772,727
2,772,727
225,846
3,022,727
969,918
2,363,668
2,272,727
2,772,727
2,772,727
2,272,727
873,915
375,516
166,000
799,710
0.19
(0.49)
719,716
0.38
(0.30)

99,961
30,741,846
35,361,231

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

252 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

DOWNTOWN SEWER BASIN PS A-7 REHABILITATION

RIVERLAND ANNEX SW 21 STREET FORCE MAIN REPL
FIVEASH WATER PLANT PHASE 2 IMPROVEMENTS
VICTORIA PARK A NORTH-SMALL WATERMAINS
CENTRAL NEW RIVER W/MAIN RIVER CROSSING
LAKE RIDGE SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS
DILLARD PARK SEWER BASIN A-1 REHAB
SEWER BASIN D-40 REHAB
PORT CONDO SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS
PROSPECT WELLFIELD SLUDGE REMOVAL
FIVEASH WATER TREATMENT PLANT - CHEMICAL SYSTEM

NE 16 AVENUE LARGE WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS
FIVEASH WTP DIESEL HIGH SERVICE PUMP REPLACEMENT

FIVEASH WATER TREATMENT PLANT FILTER REHAB

P11769
P10508
P10850
P10814
P10851
FY20130220
FY20130221
P11080
P11591
P11594

P11467
FY20130218

FY20100203

NW SECOND AVE TANK RESTORATION
PUMP STATION B-10 REHAB
SE 17 ST LARGE WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
VIBRATION & NOISE ASMT/ REMEDY PUMP B-14
PUMP STATION A-12 REHAB
PUMP STATION B-22 REHABILITATION
PUMP STATION D-45 REHABILITATION
PUMP STATION D-37 REHAB
PUMP STATIONS A7 & A8 IMPROVEMENTS
ANNUAL UTILITIES RESTORATION 2014
VICTORIA PARK B - SOUTH SMALL WATER MAINS IMPR

P11887
P11879
P11770
P11893
P11880
P11882
P11881
P11766
P11836
P11905
P11901
P11991

A-19 EMERGENCY SANITATION SEWER REPLACEM
DIXE WELLFIELD ABANDONMENT
CMS REHABILITATION
PUMP STATIONS A-44 A-97 C-31 ABANDONMENT
ADVERTISING/PERMITS/PRINTING BEFORE BIDS
FLORIDIAN AQUIFER WELLFIELD
ANNUAL CONTRACT 2011-12 UTILITIES REPAIR
UTILITY BILLING SYSTEM REPLACEMENT
PEELE DIXIE WELLFIELD CONTAMINATION
WATER SUPPLY PLANNING ASSISTANCE
2012-2013 ANNUAL UTILITIES RESTORATION
ANNUAL WATER SERVICE REPLACEMENT 2012-13
UTILITIES IT SPECIAL PROJECTS/REPLACEMEN
W/WTR FLOW,RAINFALL MONITORING & SUMMARY

Project Title

P11831
P11399
P11476
P11889
P10669
P11481
P11652
P11139
P09325
P10760
P11787
P11859
P11248
P11721

Project
Number

-

-

(94,016)
-

-

176,437
51,681
49,931
48,232
47,000
29,406
28,018
9,685
49
-

237,461
159,180
109,430
108,267
15,858
15,687
11,005
10,553
8,107
4,583
2,332
249,889
191,834
177,920

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

100,000
94,016

-

-

50,000
1,280,732
500,000
500,000
272,727
272,727
149,240
-

2,500,000

225,000
195,000
195,000
294,625
450,000
750,000
2,320,000

478,000
425,594
426,982
705,000
700,000
272,727

1,250,000
249,300
-

43,307
250,000
100,000
-

FY 2015

573,563
530,019
300,000

(237,461)
(149,180)
(89,430)
(43,307)
(15,858)
(15,687)
(11,005)
(10,553)
(8,107)
(4,583)
(2,332)
158,166
109,000

FY 2014*

-

-

853,822
2,500,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
1,000,000

1,500,000

750,000
1,620,000

-

250,000
100,000
-

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

2,500,000

3,300,000
2,663,552

3,000,000

-

-

750,000
-

-

250,000
100,000
-

FY 2017

-

-

1,000,000

-

-

-

-

-

-

100,000
-

FY 2018

2,500,000

3,300,000
2,663,552

150,000
(0.33)
2,134,554
500,000
500,000
2,772,727
2,272,727
149,240
2,000,000
5,000,000

4,272,727

2,000,000
831,000
349,931
48,232
750,000
650,000
650,000
304,310
450,049
2,955,000
4,640,000

10,000
20,000
108,267
(0.21)
0.40
0.44
0.29
0.45
0.45
0.32
999,889
750,000
286,920

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 253

PEELE DIXIE ALTERNATIVE WATER SUPPLY
CONSTRUCTION
BROWARD BLVD - LARGE WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS

FY20100218

Parking Fund

ADA COMPLIANCE REHAB PROJECTS-PARKING
ADA MODS & PARKING LOT REPAIRS 2010/11
BAHIA MAR BRIDGE REHAB
BARRIER ISLAND PARKING GARAGE
CENTRAL BCH WAYFINDING & INFO SIGNAGE
CITY HALL GARAGE LIGHTING REHAB
CITY PARK GARAGE PHASE III MALL REHAB
FUEL STORAGE TANK REMOVAL & REPLACEMENT
HELISTOP PARKING LOT IMPROVEMENTS
NEW AQUATICS CENTER/PARKING GARAGE
NORTH BEACH PARKING LOT
NOT PROJECT RELATED
OCEANSIDE LOT - REHAB
OCEANSIDE LOT - TURTLE LIGHTING
PARKING ADMIN BLDG STRUCTURAL REPAIRS
S BEACH LOT ADA COMPLIANCE & A1A WALKWAY
SEBASTIAN LOT CONSTRUCT PARKING GARAGE
SUSTAINABLE PARKING LOT IMPROVEMENTS
SOUTH ANDREWS PARKING SPACE AND METER
INSTALLATION
P11993
MOBILE ENFORCEMENT FOR CITY WIDE PARKING
ENHANCEME
P11994
NORTH BEACH PARKING LOT
Fund 461 Parking Fund Total

P10768
P11760
P11779
P11657
P11595
P11658
P10709
P11118
P11307
P10648
P11848
P00001
P11279
P11659
P11660
P11282
P11334
P11921
P11992

$

$

P11742
GTL WWTP 54" FORCE MAIN EMERGENCY RP
Fund 458 Central Regional W/W System Fund Total

Central Regional W/W System

$

17TH STREET CAUSEWAY- LARGE WATER MAIN
REPLACEMENT
P11459
POINCIANA PARK (NORTH) - LARGE WATER MAIN
SEABREEZE BOULEVARD - LARGE WATER MAIN
P11463
REPLACEMENT
Fund 454 Water and Sewer Master Plan Total

P11465

P11466

SW 31ST AVE - LARGE WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENT

Project Title

P11461

Project
Number

500,000
400,000
100,000
1,000,000

584,009
177,144
54,460
100,000
435,550
357,500
258,939
127,850
400,566
270,507
1,479,980
415,800
92,000
109,242
245,762
306,813
46,799
1,200,000
6,662,919

-

(46,019,161)

55,465,465
123,960
123,960

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014*

-

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

-

-

-

5,500,000
5,500,000

-

-

-

33,553,739

FY 2015

-

-

-

-

-

2,000,000
2,000,000

-

-

-

37,942,112

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

-

-

20,227,104

-

-

-

-

1,663,552

FY 2017
-

-

-

-

-

6,736,500

-

1,700,000

1,714,000

2,222,500

FY 2018

7,600,000
15,162,919

400,000

584,009
177,144
54,460
100,000
435,550
357,500
258,939
127,850
400,566
270,507
1,479,980
415,800
92,000
109,242
245,762
306,813
46,799
1,200,000
500,000

123,960
123,960

107,905,759

-

1,700,000

1,714,000

2,222,500

1,663,552

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

-

-

-

-

4,400,000
17,386,000

2,400,000

5,600,000

4,986,000

Unfunded
Needs

254 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Project Title

P10422
P10462
P10773
P10882
P10883
P10963
P10965
P11133
P11181
P11242
P11355
P11453
P11583
P11655
P11656
P11748
P11749
P11861
P11862
P11909
P11911
P11863
P11723
P11995
P11996
P11997
P11998
P11750
P11747
P11999
FY20110011
FY20110013
FY20120100
FY20130186

Airport

RUNWAY 8-26 REHABILITATION
FXE SECURITY & ACCESS PROGRAM-PHASE II
DESIGN SERVICES AIRPORT SECURITY PHASE 3
TAXIWAYS D & C PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
3DAAP UPDATE SERVICES
CONSTRUCT EASTERN PERIMETER ROAD
CONSTRUCT AIRPORT SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS
PERIMETER ROAD IMPROVEMENTS
CONSTRUCT AIRPORT MAINTENANCE BUILDING
DESIGN & CONSTRUCT CUSTOMS BLDING APRON
DESIGN AND CONTRUCT PERIMETER ROADS
RELOCATION OF T/W GOLF
EXECUTIVE AIRPORT MASTER DRAINAGE STUDY
SECURITY ANNEX AT THE EXECUTIVE AIRPORT
EXECUTIVE AIRPORT LANDSCAPING PROGRAM
R/W 26, 13, 31 BY-PASS T/W
TAXILANE CHARLIE PAVEMENT & LIGHTING
TAXIWAY SIERRA PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
ADMINISTRATION BUILDING RENOVATION -LEED
EXEC AIRPRT LIGHTING CNTRL PNL FOR TOWER
EXECUTIVE AIRPORT SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS
EASTERN PERIMETER LOOP RD - PHASE 1
HELISTOP W STAIRCASE REPLACEMENT
EXECUTIVE AIRPORT PEDESTRIAN/BIKE PATH
OBSERVATION AREA PARKING EXPANSION
AIRFIELD LIGHTING REHABILITATION
R/W 8/26 & 13/31 PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
TAXIWAY ECHO PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
DESIGN & CONSTRUCT T/W ECHO EXTENSION
TAXIWAY FOXTROT PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
EASTERN PERIMETER ROAD-PHASE 2
RELOCATION OF T/W GOLF-PHASE II
ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAYS NOVEMBER & DELTA
SOUTH PERIMETER LOOP ROAD

NEW AQUATICS CENTER/PARKING GARAGE
LAS OLAS INTRACOASTAL PROMENADE / MARINA
11677
EXPANSION
11900
LAS OLAS BLVD CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
Fund 462 Parking Revenue Bond Fund Total

P10648

Parking Revenue Bond

Project
Number

$
1,000,000
340,000
250,000
135,000
116,000
108,000
54,250
43,750
17,500
-

-

7,293,910
212,749
457,582
25,974
1,278,551
82
43,976
172,308
730,000
380,472
4,596,027
229,375
270,760
5
471,500
61,711
221,250
1,594,332
299,930
506,768
509,807
153,472
199,141
314,871
214,388
6,250
-

-

FY 2014*

7,293,910

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

-

-

250,000
139,500
270,000
135,000
50,000
12,500
-

FY 2015

-

270,000
135,000
300,000
112,500
15,000
-

7,000,000
7,000,000

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

-

134,750
500,000

FY 2017

FY 2018

-

-

-

212,749
457,582
25,974
1,278,551
82
43,976
172,308
730,000
380,472
4,596,027
229,375
270,760
5
471,500
61,711
221,250
1,594,332
299,930
506,768
509,807
153,472
1,199,141
654,871
500,000
135,000
116,000
108,000
408,138
590,000
287,500
350,000
125,000
149,750
500,000

7,000,000
14,293,910

7,293,910

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

20,979,808
20,979,808

Unfunded
Needs

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 255

$

ADVERTISING/PERMITS/PRINTING BEFORE BIDS
P10669
P10986
PUMP ST 2 POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICE IMP
P11139
UTILITY BILLING SYSTEM REPLACEMENT
P11426
NORTH FORK OF THE NEW RIVER PCD INSTALL
P11613
2010-11 ANNUAL STORM DRAINAGE CONTRACT
P11652
ANNUAL CONTRACT 2011-12 UTILITIES REPAIR
P11713
2011-12 ANNUAL STORM DRAINAGE CONTRACT
P11780
ANNUAL STORM DRAINAGE CONTRACT 2012/13
2012-2013 ANNUAL UTILITIES RESTORATION
P11787
P11857
ANNUAL UTILITIES RESTORATION 2012-13
P11867
HENDRICKS ISLES DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
P11868
RIVER OAK STORMWATER ANALYSIS
P11869
CITYWIDE STORMWATER ANALYSIS
P11842
EDGEWOOD STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
P11868
RIVER OAK STORMWATER ANALYSIS
P11844
DURRS AREA STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
P11843
PROGRESSO STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
P11845
DORSEY RIVERBEND STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
P11419
RIVER OAKS PRESERVE
Fund 470 Stormwater Total

P10508
P10529
P10567
P10571
P10762
P10809
P10814
P10815
P10824
P10847
P10848
P10850
P10851
P10852

FIVEASH WATER PLANT PHASE 2 IMPROVEMENTS
FACILITIES SECURITY FENCE GATES & CAGES
NORTHEAST AREA LARGE WATER MAINS
IMPERIAL POINT LARGE WATER MAINS
MELROSE PARK WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT
POINCIANA PARK N. SMALL WATER MAINS IMP
CENTRAL NEW RIVER W/MAIN RIVER CROSSING
TARPON RIVER AREA LARGE WATER MAIN
PEELE-DIXIE WELLFIELD IMP PHASE 4 CONST
POINSETTA HEIGHTS SMALL WATER MAINS
SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER N. SMALL WATER MAINS
VICTORIA PARK A NORTH-SMALL WATERMAINS
LAKE RIDGE SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS
SOUTH MIDDLE RIVER S. WATER MAINS

Water and Sewer Debt Financed Construction Non-Regional

Stormwater

$

Project Title

FY20100157 MID-FIELD TAXIWAY EXTENSION AND RUN-UP AREA
FY20130165 ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAY KILO
FY20140028 WESTERN PERIMETER ROAD EXTENSION
FY20130209 FT LAUDERDALE EXECUTIVE AIRPORT - ESCO
Fund 468 Airport Fund Total

Project
Number

15,525,510
(2,303)
(1,238)
44
29,120
(9,429)
117,150
762,119
13,938
(502,632)
296,851
2,846,072
427,898
34,312

23,197
114,571
31,534
143,630
191,354
3,166
29,376
1,788,552
1,958
25,000
674,366
270,572
50,000
281,282
270,572
145,361
285,966
145,421
304,555
4,780,432

12,951,282

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

(15,475,510)
2,303
1,238
(44)
(29,120)
9,470
(762,119)
502,632
(2,134,554)
52,102
-

200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
200,000
300,000
1,300,000

2,064,500

FY 2014*

-

500,000
500,000

857,000

FY 2015

-

1,000,000
1,000,000
300,000
2,300,000

832,500

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

-

1,000,000
1,000,000

73,000
10,000
717,750

FY 2017

-

1,000,000
1,000,000
2,000,000

236,550
56,000
292,550

FY 2018

50,000
0.38
0.35
0.27
(0.17)
41
117,150
0.49
13,938
(0.42)
296,851
711,518
480,000
34,312

23,197
114,571
31,534
143,630
191,354
3,166
29,376
1,788,552
1,958
25,000
674,366
270,572
50,000
1,481,282
1,470,572
1,345,361
1,485,966
1,345,421
1,404,555
11,880,432

309,550
10,000
56,000
17,715,582

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

-

-

20,000
20,000

Unfunded
Needs

256 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget
$

$

$

$

P11851
REFURBUSH RADIO TOWER
P11922
KRONOS UPGRADE
P11815
CITY-WIDE TELEPHONE SYSTEM UPGRADE - PHASE II
P11200
REPLACEMENT DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
FY20130231 ERP (ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING)
Fund 581 Central Services Operations Total

FLEET SERVICES FACILITY REHAB PROJECT
P11474
Fund 583 Vehicle Rental Total

P11903
SUNSET MEMORIAL GARDENS PAVING
Fund 627 Cemetery Perpetual Care Total

P11661
ARTS & SCIENCE GARAGE LIGHTING
Fund 643 Arts and Science District Garage Total

Arts and Science District Garage

Cemetery Perpetual Care

Vehicle Rental

Central Services Operations

$

Project Title

P10853
FLAGLER HEIGHTS SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROV
P10940
SEWER AREA 19 ANNEXED RIVERLAND W&S MNS
P11080
PORT CONDO SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENTS
P11118
FUEL STORAGE TANK REMOVAL & REPLACEMENT
P11155
SE 2ND ST SMALL WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENT
P11342
W/W CONVEYANCE BASIN A-12
P11345
BOULEVARD GARDENS WEST SMALL WATER MAINS
P11471
SHADY BANKS SMALL WM IMPROVMNT - PHASE 2
P11484
DIXIE WELLFIELD RAW WATER MAIN RPLCMNT
P11589
FIVEASH WTP DISINFECTION IMPROVEMENTS
P11622
SW 20 CT, SW 22 TER, SW 24 AV SML WTR MN
P11685
WATER MONITORING SYSTEM (SCADA)
P11828
FILTERS 10, 11, 12, & 13 REHAB-FIVEASH
P11860
WATER DISTRIBUTION & WASTE WTR R&R
P11932
AERATION BASIN AT FIVEASH REHAB
P11719
SUNRISE BVD MIDDLE RVR BDGE WM RELOC/DES
P11720
IMPERIAL POINT LARGE WATER MN - PHASE 2
P11766
PUMP STATION D-37 REHAB
P11836
PUMP STATIONS A7 & A8 IMPROVEMENTS
P11858
WATER & SEWER MASTER PLAN UPDATE
P11887
NW SECOND AVE TANK RESTORATION
Fund 482 Water and Sewer Debt Financed Non-Regional Total

Project
Number

257,400
257,400

29,759
29,759

19,166
19,166

149,462
200,000
247,985
597,447

(26,794)
194,957
349,240
115,746
161,277
269,772
(65,484)
739,796
(3,254)
988,575
49,661
225,425
55,584
200,000
22,791,916

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

700,000

-

-

-

890,555
500,000
1,390,555

1,599,602
883,875
280,000
1,000,000
750,000
(5,903,376)

971,953
1,223,404
(149,518)
(115,746)
(161,277)
65,484
260,204
3,254
4,000,000
274,575
344,416
(200,000)
200,000

FY 2014*
-

-

-

-

5,000,000
5,000,000

FY 2015

FY 2016

-

-

-

-

-

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan
FY 2017

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2018

-

-

-

-

-

257,400
257,400

29,759
29,759

19,166
19,166

149,462
200,000
1,138,540
500,000
5,000,000
6,988,002

945,159
1,418,361
199,722
0.48
(0.16)
269,772
(0.29)
1,000,000
0.08
4,988,575
49,661
500,000
400,000
200,000
700,000
1,599,602
883,875
280,000
1,000,000
750,000
16,888,540

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

Unfunded
Needs

-

-

-

-

-

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 257

$

$

P11750
TAXIWAY ECHO PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
P11999
TAXIWAY FOXTROT PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
FY20110013 RELOCATION OF T/W GOLF-PHASE II
FY20120100 ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAYS NOVEMBER & DELTA
FY20130165 ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAY KILO
Fund 779 FAA - Federal Aviation Administration Grants Total

GRAND TOTAL

190,876,069

145,000
145,000

90,771
710
91,481

Unspent
Balance
August 28,
2013

2,511,000
315,000
2,826,000

1,500,000
139,500
1,080,000
951,000
464,000
432,000
61,000
17,500
4,645,000

FY 2015

$ (21,487,964) $ 90,351,507

2,619,000
2,619,000

145,000
976,000
200,000
1,321,000

FY 2014*

*The Fiscal Year 2014 CIP includes funding for anticipated grants that will not be appropriated until they are secured.
**The Fiscal Year 2014 - Fiscal Year 2018 CIP Total includes unspent balances as of August 28, 2013.

FAA Grants

$

Project Title

11681
SR A1A (WESTSIDE) STREETSCAPE
11750
TAXIWAY ECHO PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
11861
TAXIWAY SIERRA PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
11747
DESIGN & CONSTRUCT T/W ECHO EXTENSION
11487
NW 9 AVENUE STREETSCAPE
P11997
AIRFIELD LIGHTING REHABILITATION
P11998
R/W 8/26 & 13/31 PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
FY20110036 MIDDLE RIVER TERRACE - DIXIE HWY STREETSCAPE
P11999
TAXIWAY FOXTROT PAVEMENT REHABILITATION
FY20130183 SW 4TH AVE BIKE/PED PROJECT
FY20130239 SR A1A GREENWAY
FY20120133 NE/SE 3RD AVENUE COMPLETE STREET
FY20120132 ANDREWS AVENUE CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENTS
11136
LAS OLAS BOULEVARD SAFETY PROJECT
FY20110011 EASTERN PERIMETER ROAD-PHASE 2
FY20110013 RELOCATION OF T/W GOLF-PHASE II
FY20120100 ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAYS NOVEMBER & DELTA
FY20100157 MID-FIELD TAXIWAY EXTENSION AND RUN-UP AREA
FY20130165 ACUTE ANGLE TAXIWAY KILO
Fund 778 FDOT Grants Total

FDOT Grants

Project
Number

$ 89,786,754

2,430,000
225,000
2,655,000

1,080,000
135,000
1,012,000
1,000,000
907,008
583,489
341,282
200,000
12,500
5,271,279

FY 2016

City of Fort Lauderdale
FY 2014 - FY 2018
Five-Year Community Investment Plan

$ 38,707,734

2,430,000
2,025,000
270,000
4,725,000

1,200,000
112,500
15,000
3,346,271

1,883,771
135,000
-

FY 2017

$ 29,083,886

2,425,500
180,000
2,605,500

8,147,150
134,750
292,000
10,000
8,583,900

FY 2018

$

417,317,986

5,275,000
5,175,000
2,250,000
2,695,500
180,000
15,575,500

1,590,771
285,210
976,000
2,360,000
951,000
464,000
432,000
1,944,771
287,500
1,012,000
1,000,000
9,054,158
583,489
341,282
1,400,000
125,000
149,750
292,000
10,000
23,258,931

FY 2014-2018
CIP Total**

$ 300,967,858

-

12,000,000
5,800,000
3,000,000
20,800,000

Unfunded
Needs

258 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 259

Visioning

Strategic Plan

Action Plan

Budget/CIP Plan

Estimating
Conference
Appointment

Estimating
Conference
Appointment

D
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Review of
Fiscal
Capacity
Study (cont.)

C
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Review of
Fiscal
Capacity
Study

Revenue
Estimating Conference

Environmental Scan
(Financial)

Budget
Planning/
Calendar

Yes

Adoption
?

Visioning
Statement

10

Review of
Financial
Forecast

E
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Tax &
Fee Rates
CIP Weighting
Consensus

Financial
Forecast

19
Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

11

15b

21
City Manager
Budget
& CIP
Review Meetings

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

June

Departmental Presentations

August

Stakeholders
Input

Neighbor
Outcomes

Budget/CIP

Action Plan

Strategic Plan

Information
Analysis

&LW\RI)RUW/DXGHUGDOH·V
6WUDWHJLF3ODQQLQJ
3URFHVV

Proposed
Budget &
CIP to BAB

G
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Budget
Review

Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

Budget
Review

H
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

24
Proposed
Budget & CIP
To
City
Commission

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Fund Summaries
Budget & CIP
Review

22
Preliminary
Budget
to
City
Commission

Proposed
Strategic
Plan

12

July

Boards

City
Commission

Neighbors

City
Staff

Budget
Review

I
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Approve
?
Yes

First Public
Hearing to Set
Tentative
Millage &
Budget
No

25
City
Commission
Meeting

No

Adopted
Budget,
CIP &
Strategic
Plan

27

Yes

Approve
?

Second Public
Hearing
& Adoption of
Budget

26
City
Commission
Meeting

Communication

Preparation

Document

Decision

Task/Process

6KDSHV/HJHQG

September
&RORU/HJHQG

Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Development/Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

23
City Commission
Budget Workshops

F
Budget Advisory Board
Budget & CIP Review

Environmental Scan
(Legislative)

20
Strategic
Budget
Kickoff &
Preparation

Prioritization
?

Action
Plans

Neighbor Forums

May

Neighbor Forums

14
City
Commission
Workshop

Preliminary
Strategic
Plan

CAAP
Development

18
Team Review of
CIP Project Applications

16

A
Budget
Advisory
Board Meeting

No

April
3
City
Commission
Meeting

9
Align Strategic
Plan with
Vision
Statement
& Strategic
Priorities

March

17
Base Budget/
Community Investment Plan (CIP)
Development

Presentation
of Survey
Results

8
City
Commission
Meeting

February

15

B
Audit
Advisory
Board

13
Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

5
Neighbor
Annual Survey

Environmental Scan
(Strategic)

Draft Strategic Plan
Preparation

7
All
Team
Planning
Session

Visioning Analysis & Writing

2
Visioning Committee

January

6

December

4

1
Neighbor
(Visioning) Summit

November

STRATEGIC PLANNING AND BUDGETING CYCLE

C I T Y OF F ORT L AU DE R D A L E

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Visioning Lane
3
City
Commission
Meeting

2
Visioning Committee

1
Neighbor
(Visioning) Summit

Visioning
Statement

Visioning Analysis & Writing
No

Adoption
?

November

April

This event was the
culmination of a major
two- year outreach process
to develop the 2035 Fort
Lauderdale
Vision.
It
brought together more than 100 residents, who
developed more than 50 Vision Statements across
three categories chosen by the group as summit
priorities: Connected Development, Infrastructure, and
Culture and Public Spaces.

The Vision Statement outlines what
the community wants to be by 2035.
It is a long-term view and concentrates
on the future. The Visioning
Committee will present the 2035
Visioning
Vision Plan to the City Commission.
Statement
The Vision Statement will be
aspirational, inspirational, inclusive,
Adoption
and unique to the City of Fort
?
Lauderdale. It will guide City strategic
planning and budgeting, as well as communitywide
partnerships. The Vision Plan will contain a Vision
Statement, Strategic Directions, and an Implementation
Strategy. Moving forward, the Implementation Strategy
will include integration into strategic planning and
budgeting, as well as a Vision Scorecard. Upon adoption
by the Commission, the visioning outreach and work of
the Visioning Committee will be complete.

1
N eighbor
(V isioning) Sum m it

December
2
Visioning Committee

Visioning Analysis & Writing

The 2035 Fort Lauderdale Vision will be developed
from nearly 1,500 ideas generated through various
outreach mechanisms. From September of 2011 to
December of 2012, community engagement was
conducted through Phase 1, which included open
houses and stakeholder interviews; and Phase 2, which
included the Big Ideas social ideation website, civic
association presentations, Telephone Town Hall
Meetings, Meetings-in-a-Box, a Big Ideas event, and a
Neighbor Summit.

260 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

3
City
Commission
Meeting

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Strategic Plan Lane
4

6

Draft Strategic Plan
Preparation

Environmental Scan
(Strategic)

7
All
Team
Planning
Session

5
Neighbor
Annual Survey

8
City
Commission
Meeting
Presentation
of Survey
Results

November

January

The Strategic Plan has been in
The Environmental Scan for the
6
development
for
several
Vision and Strategic Plan was
Environmental Scan
Draft Strategic Plan months
and
significant
conducted
from
November
(Strategic)
Preparation
progress has been made in
through April of FY 2012 and takes
preparation for the FY 2014 –
into consideration external and
FY 2018 Strategic Plan.
internal factors that could influence the direction and
priorities of the City such as demographic trends, social
change, economic analysis, political factors, legislative
issues, land development trends, technology, process
improvements, staffing, etc. The Environmental Scan for
the five-year strategic planning process will be conducted
again in FY 2018 in preparation for the FY 2019 - FY 2023
Strategic Plan.
4

December/January

February

The Neighbor Survey will
gauge the overall pulse of the
community, and evaluate
perceptions regarding the
quality of life and satisfaction with City services. The
survey results will be compared with and integrated
into components of the Vision Plan, and help
prioritize the delivery of services through strategic
planning and budgeting. A third-party survey
provider mailed 5,000 community surveys to Fort
Lauderdale residents in December and January.
Households were randomly selected, representative
of the four Commission districts and the 2010
Census demographics. The survey will be conducted
annually and serve as input for the five-year
strategic plan, the Commission Annual Action Plan,
and annual Cylinder of Excellence team work plans.

The All Team Planning Session will focus on
organizational priorities in consideration of
All
the Visioning feedback, the Commission
Team
Annual Action Plan, the Neighbor Survey,
Planning
and key performance/data, and trends.
Session
Participants will discuss top budget
priorities and Cylinder of Excellence refinements.
Attendees include the Community Building Leadership
Team (CBLT), Deputy and Assistant Directors, Cylinder of
Excellence Teams, and Management Fellows.
The City Commission meeting will
8
include presentations on the results of
City
the Neighbor Annual Survey.

5
Neighbor
Annual Survey

7

Commission
Meeting
Presentation
of Survey
Results

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 261

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Strategic Plan Lane
9
Align Strategic
Plan with
Vision
Statement
& Strategic
Priorities

10

12

Preliminary
Strategic
Plan

Proposed
Strategic
Plan
11
Neighbor Forums

March/April
9
Align Strategic
Plan with
Vision
Statement
& Strategic
Priorities

May

The draft Strategic Plan will be
Various communication forums which
11
aligned with the 2035 Vision
include neighbors, business owners
Neighbor Forums
Statement to reflect community
and other stakeholders, held
feedback in City goals, objectives,
throughout the year to ensure
performance
indicators, neighbor engagement in the City’s Visioning, Strategic
initiatives,
and
resource Planning, Community Annual Action Plan (CAAP), and
allocation.
Budget and Community Investment Plan (CIP)
Development. Neighbor forums include community
visioning sessions, neighbor surveying, focus group
discussions, telephone town hall meetings, electronic
forums, meetings in a box, other outreach, etc.

July
The Strategic Plan is a roadmap to
set direction for the future, guide
Preliminary
decision-making
and
resource
Strategic
allocation, enabling an excellent
Plan
and sustainable quality of life. The
proposed Strategic Plan document
will be presented to the City Commission along with
the Proposed Budget and the Five Year Community
Investment Plan in July.
10

262 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

12
Proposed
Strategic
Plan

The Proposed Strategic Plan will be
presented to the City Commission along
with the Proposed Budget and the Five Year
Community Investment Plan.

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Action Plan Lane
13
Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

CAAP
Development

14
City
Commission
Workshop
Action
Plans

Prioritization
?

Neighbor Forums

On-going Throughout Year
13
Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP)
Implementation/Monitoring & Reporting
(ongoing)

April
14
City
Commission
Workshop
Action
Plans

The Commission Annual Action Plan (CAAP) is the
product of collaboration and prioritization by the
City Commission, the City Manager’s Office, and
Department Directors. It contains initiatives of
significant importance to the organization. Progress
is monitored through the monthly FL²STAT, with
quarterly Commission reporting. The CAAP is
integrated into the Cylinders of Excellence annual
work plans.

This Commission Workshop will be
dedicated to prioritization of the City
Commission Annual Action plan items to
ensure that resources are accurately
allocated
according
to
the
City
Commission’s priorities.

Prioritization
?

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 263

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Budget/CIP Plan Lane

December
The Financial Scan
15
includes
the
Environmental Scan
preparation
of
the
(Financial)
fiscal capacity study,
the financial forecast, and the on-going development
of fiscal integrity principles and policies. Each of these
components of the financial scan are underway with
completion scheduled for early 2013.

A
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Budget
Planning/
Calendar

The kickoff of
the
development
of the City’s
base operating budget, five year Community Investment
Plan, performance measures and current year estimates
for both revenues and expenditures. Departments will
be asked to update their submissions into a more
aligned and strategic budget during the coming months.
Staff presents the first part of the Fiscal
C
January
Budget
Capacity Study to the Budget Advisory
The Budget Advisory Board (BAB) sets the
Advisory
Board. The Board makes recommendations
Board
upcoming budget process calendar and
Meeting
for changes.
establishes their priorities for the
Review of
Fiscal
upcoming budget cycle.
17
Base Budget/
Community Investment Plan (CIP)
Development

Capacity
Study

Estimating
Conference
Appointment

B
Audit
Advisory
Board

February

Audit Advisory Board selects a member to
participate on the Revenue Estimating
Committee.

March

The Community Investment
Plan (CIP) applications will be
reviewed for consideration
and funding by the CIP Review Committee. Each
application will be scored utilizing the prioritized matrix.
Scores and final ranking will be utilized as a guide to
funding.
Staff presents the second part of the Fiscal
D
February
Budget
Capacity Study to the Budget Advisory
The
Revenue
Advisory
16
Board. The Board makes recommendations
Board
Estimating
Revenue
Meeting
for changes.
Conference will be
Estimating Conference
Review of
Fiscal
established
and
Capacity
Study (cont.)
used to review revenue estimates for the budget
process.
Conference principals will include one
principal from the budget office; one principal from
the Finance Department, one principal from the
Budget Advisory Board, and one principal from the
Audit Advisory Board.
Estimating
Conference
Appointment

264 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

18
Team Review of
CIP Project Applications

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Budget/CIP Plan Lane

April
19
Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop
Financial
Forecast
Tax &
Fee Rates
CIP Weighting
Consensus

May

The City Commission will be asked for a
consensus on the millage rate and the fire
assessment fee during this workshop.
Once a consensus is achieved, staff will be
able to finalize the budget based on the
information
provided.
The
City
Commission and Budget Advisory Board
Joint Workshop to review the Five Year
Financial Forecast and to discuss the
budget for the coming year.

During this time, departments will be asked
20
to update their submissions into a more
Strategic
strategic budget, aligned with the City’s
Budget
vision statement and strategic priorities.
Kickoff &
Preparation

The Legislative Scan considers external factors that could influence the
direction and goals of the City such as impacts from legislative processes at
the county, state, and federal levels, as well as, by other intergovernmental
entities.
Telephone Town Hall meetings
are held throughout the year to
allow the City Commission to
personally
interact
with
neighbors to discuss important topics such as Strategic
Planning, the upcoming Budget, and the Community
Investment Plan.

This is an administrative review of
comprehensive
departmental
operational
budgets
including
staffing structure, line items, and
performance
measures
with
tentative determination by City Manager of Proposed
Budget.

The Budget Advisory Board reviews
the preliminary results of the Burton
and Associates Five Year Financial
Forecast in preparation for the Joint
Workshop with the City Commission.

City Departments present
their FY 2014 Requested
Operating
Budgets,
Departmental Presentations
Community
Investment
Plan
projects,
and
performance measures to the Budget Advisory Board
at one or more meetings.

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

E
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Review of
Financial
Forecast

21
City Manager
Budget
& CIP
Review Meetings

F
Budget Advisory Board
Budget & CIP Review

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 265

Strategic Planning and Budgeting Cycle
Budget/CIP Plan Lane
23
City Commission
Budget Workshops
Fund Summaries
Budget & CIP
Review

Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

24
Proposed
Budget & CIP
To
City
Commission

25
City
Commission
Meeting
First Public
Hearing to Set
Tentative
Millage &
Budget
No

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting
H
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

I
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

Proposed
Budget &
CIP to BAB

Budget
Review

Budget
Review

The presentation of the preliminary
budget to the City Commission for their
review and discussion at the upcoming
Budget Workshops.

Legislative
review
of
the
comprehensive
budget
recommended by departments and
Fund Summaries
as proposed by City Manager
Budget & CIP
Review
including
fund
summaries
(revenues
and
expenditures
balance sheet), and presentation of each
department‘s capital projects and operating budgets.

July
Staff presents the Proposed Budget
and Community Investment Plan (CIP)
to the Budget Advisory Board.

The Proposed Budget document and
Five Year Community Investment Plan
are published and presented to the City
Commission and made available to the
public. The Proposed Strategic Plan
document will be presented along with
the Budget document.
24
Proposed
Budget & CIP
To
City
Commission

August

Budget
Review

Approve
?

27
Adopted
Budget,
CIP &
Strategic
Plan

August
H
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting
Budget
Review

The Budget Advisory Board reviews the
Proposed Budget and CIP and makes
recommendations for changes prior to the
Public Hearing.

September
I
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

The Budget Advisory Board continues review
of the Proposed Budget and CIP and makes
recommendations for changes prior to the
Public Hearing.

Budget
Review

25
City
Commission
Meeting
First Public
Hearing to Set
Tentative
Millage &
Budget

The first public hearing is legally required with
time table requirements for setting of tentative
property tax millage rate and tentative budget.

Approve
?
Yes

Proposed
Budget &
CIP to BAB

Joint City
Commission
Budget
Advisory
Board
Workshop

Telephone Town
Hall Meeting

G
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

23
City Commission
Budget Workshops

G
Budget
Advisory
Board
Meeting

No

Yes

June
22
Preliminary
Budget
to
City
Commission

Second Public
Hearing
& Adoption of
Budget

Budget
Review
Approve
?
Yes

22
Preliminary
Budget
to
City
Commission

26
City
Commission
Meeting

The Joint Workshop between the City
Commission and the Budget Advisory Board
to discuss the Proposed Budget and the
CIP.

266 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

26
City
Commission
Meeting
Second Public
Hearing
& Adoption of
Budget

Approve
?

27
Adopted
Budget,
CIP &
Strategic
Plan

The second public hearing is legally required with
time table requirements for adoption of property
tax millage rate and final budget. The adoption of
the Strategic Plan will coincide with the adoption
of the Budget and Five Year Community
Investment Plan.
The Adopted Budget and Community
Investment Plan are uploaded into the City’s
financial system and a printed version is made
available to the City Commission, City
Departments, and Neighbors. The Strategic
Plan is published.

Economy and Demographics
Fort Lauderdale
The City of Fort Lauderdale is famous for its beaches,
arts, culture and events. There is dining and shopping
on Las Olas Boulevard, gondola rides on the canals,
beautifully landscaped beachfront promenades,
luxury hotels, historical districts, and mansions and
yachts along Millionaires Row. Other attractions, such
as the Arts and Entertainment District and the
Riverwalk, make Fort Lauderdale a premier
destination for people of all ages. Fort Lauderdale is a
great place to live, work and raise a family, and the
City looks forward to continuing to build upon its
success to meet the challenges of the 21st Century
and beyond.
The City operates a Commission/Manager form of
government where the Commission hires the City
Manager. The Commission is comprised of five
elected officials including the Mayor and a Vice
Mayor.

Where is Fort Lauderdale Located?
The City of Fort Lauderdale is located in the eastcentral portion of Broward County. The City is
approximately 23 miles north of Miami and 42 miles
south of Palm Beach. The City of Fort Lauderdale
encompasses more than 33 square miles and is the
7th largest city in Florida and the largest of Broward
County's 30 municipalities.

Major Employers
AutoNation
Branch Banking and Trust Company (BB&T)
Bank of America
Broward County School Board
Broward County Government
Broward Health
Citrix Systems
ECI Telecom Inc.
Ed Morse Automotive Group
Holy Cross Hospital Inc.
Imperial Point Medical Center
Kaplan University
Microsoft Latin America HQ
National Beverage Corporation
Republic Services Inc.
Seacor Holdings Inc.
South African Airways
Sun Sentinel (Tribune Company)
Spherion Corporation
Stiles Corporation

Existing Land Use
Residential
Commercial
Multifamily
Industrial
Recreational
Water
Other

82.9%
6.8%
6.2%
1.9%
0.1%
0.1%
2.0%

Economic Impacts
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) has risen by 0.9% in
the Miami/Fort Lauderdale area from October 2012 to
October 20131. Building permits in the Miami/Fort
Lauderdale area numbered 17,210 from January to
October 2013, which is a 63.7% increase from the
prior year2. The unemployment rate in the Miami/Fort
Lauderdale area decreased from 8.9% in August of
2012 to 7.3% in August of 20133.
Sources:
1. Bureau of Labor Statistics (November 20, 2013).
2. National Association of Home Builders as of October 2013
3. Bureau of Labor Statistics (October 21, 2013).

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 267

Economy and Demographics
Demographics

History
The Fort Lauderdale area was known as the "New
River Settlement" prior to the 20th century. The City
of Fort Lauderdale was incorporated in 1911 and in
1915 was designated the county seat of the newly
formed Broward County. Fort Lauderdale's first major
development began in the 1920s amidst the Florida
land boom. Fort Lauderdale became a major United
States Naval Base during World War II. After the war
ended, service members returned to the area, and an
enormous population explosion began in earnest.
Today, the City of Fort Lauderdale is known as a major
yachting capital, one of the nation's most popular
tourist destinations, and the center of a metropolitan
area of 1.8 million people with more than 10 million
visitors annually.

Demographics
Population
Median Age
Median Household Income
Per Capita Income
Sex
Male
Female
Race
White
Black/African-American
Hispanic or Latino
Asian
American Indian
Other

168,358
40.7
$50,997
$31,539

51.5%
48.5%

Age
Less than 20 years
20 to 34 years
35 to 59 years
More than 59 years

22.5%
20.4%
34.5%
22.6%

Education
Population 25 years and older:
Less than high school graduate
High school graduate or higher
Bachelor degree or higher

14.7%
51.4%
33.9%

Dwelling Units
Single Family
Multi Family

49.6%
50.4%

Housing Tenure
Owner occupied housing units
Renter occupied housing units

53.3%
46.7%

Household by Type
Married
Male householder
Female householder
Non-family households

31.6%
4.7%
10.8%
52.9%

Average household size
Average family size
48.1%
30.0%
17.2%
1.6%
0.1%
3.0%

Sources: The Office of Economic &
Demographic Research. The 2012 American
Community Survey.
Hispanic or Latino
17.2%

2.4
3.5

Race Population
Asian
1.6%

American
Indian/Alaska
Native
0.1%

Other Races
3.0%

White
48.1%

Black/African
American
30.0%

268 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

City Recreation & Infrastructure
Recreation Facilities:
Acres of Parks
Playgrounds
Pavilions
Municipal Swimming Pools
Boat Slips, Moorings
Miles of Public Beach
Miles of Navigable Waterways
Seating Capacity:
War Memorial Auditorium
Baseball Stadium
Lockhart Stadium
Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex
Handball and Racquetball Courts
Shuffleboard Courts
Tennis Courts
Gymnasiums
Fitness Trails
Water Access Parks
Natural Areas

876
52
42
14
190
5.3
165
2,110
8,340
19,500
1,740
7
6
49
7
10
24
8

Socioeconomic:
Average Family Size
Median Household Income*
Per Capita Income*

3.48
$
$

50,997
31,539

Infrastructure:
Executive Airport
Helistop
City Buildings
Miles of Sidewalks
Miles of Streets
Miles of Sanitary Sewers
Miles of Storm Drainage
Miles of Water Mains
City Bridges
Storm and Wastewater Pumping Stations
Fire Stations
Fire Hydrants
City Maintained Parking Spaces
City Parking Lots
City Parking Garages
Cemeteries
Water Treatment Plants
Wastewater Treatment Plants
Raw Water Wellfields
Deep Well Injection Site
Railroad Stations
Bus Stations
Transit Bus Stops
Bus Shelters
B-Cyle Bike Share Stations
Water Taxi Stops

1
1
112
420
500
595
171
783
52
208
10
5,812
10,937
37
4
4
2
1
2
1
2
2
768
59
13
15

*Income reported in 2012 inflation-adjusted dollars
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2012 American Community Survey

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 269

A Desirable City for A Successful Business
MAJOR CORPORATIONS AND EMPLOYERS






















AutoNation
Branch Banking and Trust Company
Bank of America
Broward County School Board
Broward County Government
Broward Health
Citrix Systems
ECI Telecom Inc.
Ed Morse Automotive Group
Holy Cross Hospital, Inc.

Imperial Point Medical Center
Kaplan University
Microsoft Latin America HQ
National Beverage Corporation
Republic Services Inc.
Seacor Holdings, Inc.
South African Airways
Sun-Sentinel (Tribune Company)
Spherion Corporation
Stiles Corporation

ACCESSIBILITY
Downtown Fort Lauderdale is located within
three miles of Port Everglades, Fort
Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport,
the Amtrak Railway, I-95, I-595 and the Tri-Rail
commuter train.

Fort Lauderdale is located less than an hour
from Miami and Palm Beach International
Airports, and offers convenient access to
international markets including Africa, Latin
America, the Caribbean, Canada, Europe and
the Pacific Rim.

AIR TRANSPORTATION
Fort
Lauderdale/Hollywood
International
Airport
- Ranks as one of the fastest-growing airports
in the United States
- Second-largest carrier of international
passengers in the state of Florida
- Contributes more than $2.7 billion to the
local economy, providing jobs to more than
8,900 employees and an additional 28,000
jobs through ancillary services
- Served 23.5 million passengers in 2012
- Averages 621 flights per day

270 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport
- One of the 10 busiest general aviation
airports in the United States
- Handles approximately 150,000 takeoffs
and landings per year
- Home to 700 aircraft, 115 jets and 40
helicopters
- Generates approximately $7 million in
annual revenue and $3 million in annual tax
revenues from airport leases
- Total annual economic activity is
$815,788,400 as determined by the Florida
Department of Transportation
- Generates total employment of 5,090 jobs
- Operates the Downtown John Fuhrer
Helistop
- Offers a 200-acre Industrial Airpark with 2
million square feet of space

A Desirable City for A Successful Business
LAND TRANSPORTATION
Railway System
- Freight carriers: Florida East Coast (FEC)
Railroad and CXS Transportation
- Passenger carriers: Amtrak and Tri-Rail
(local commuter service)

Major Roadways
- I-95, I-595, I-75 and Florida Turnpike

PORT EVERGLADES
- Generates approximately $26 billion in
business activity and 200,000 jobs
statewide annually
- Home to the world’s two largest cruise
ships, Royal Caribbean International’s Oasis
of the Seas and Allure of the Seas
- World record holder for having 53,365
cruise guests sail in and out of the Port in a
single day
- The top container port in Florida, handling
5.9 million tons of containerized cargo
annually that generates $31.3 million in
revenue
- Home to Florida’s first and largest Foreign-

Trade Zone, which moves more than 1,000
different commodities from 75 countries of
origin annually
- Launched a 20-year, $2 billion expansion to
prepare for increases in cargo, fuel and
cruise passenger traffic over the next two
decades
- Major capital projects recently completed
or currently underway are creating 3,200
new construction jobs and generating
$239.5 million in state and local taxes
- The nation’s deepest commercial port
south of Norfolk, Virginia that serves more
than 150 ports and 70 countries

BUSINESS ADVANTAGES
- A stable, business-friendly local government,
strong base of existing businesses, a welleducated labor force, diverse housing
options, and excellent quality of life
- Numerous tax advantages: no state or local
personal income tax, no county or city sales
tax, no state ad valorem, franchise or
inventory tax, no gift tax
- Numerous
economic
development
opportunities, business assistance and
incentive programs
- Advanced global communications network
featuring 700 miles of fiber optic cables and
a state-of-the-art switching station
- One of the fastest growing markets for
global trade, with more than 40 percent of
local businesses engaged in or supporting
some type of international commerce
- A downtown area that includes city and

county government centers, federal and
county courthouses, school district offices,
a state regional complex, legal services and
professional offices
- A marine industry that generates 134,539
jobs and gross wages and earnings of $3.7
billion in Broward County, along with
162,209 jobs and $13.6 billion in total
economic impact in South Florida
- More than 300 miles of waterways, marinas
and marine manufacturing and repair
facilities make Greater Fort Lauderdale a
world-class port of call for the yachting
industry
- Home of the Greater Fort Lauderdale
International Boat Show, the world’s largest
boat show, which generates an annual
economic impact of half a billion dollars

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 271

A Desirable City for A Successful Business
AREA PROFILE
- Seventh largest City in Florida
- Median Age: 42.2
- Transportation by water taxi, trolley, bus,
taxicab, and Tri-Rail commuter service

- Average temperature of 77 degrees in
winter and 89 degrees in summer
- More than 3,000 hours of annual sunshine
- Designated as the “Yachting Capital of the
World”

DOWNTOWN ATTRACTIONS
- A $55 million project featuring two
acoustically perfect theaters

Museum of Discovery and Science
- More than 450,000 annual visitors
- $30.6 million facility with more than 85,000
square feet of interactive science exhibits,
classrooms, café, store and grand atrium.
- New EcoDiscovery Center features an
Everglades Airboat Adventure, river otters
exhibit, Storm Center, giant megalodon
shark, and exciting science theater shows
- Five-story, 300 seat AutoNation IMAX®
Theater features both 2D and 3D films

Museum of Art
- Permanent home of a $6 million collection
including CoBrA, Pre-Columbian and West
African art, as well as 20th Century
paintings
- Played host to high profile traveling art
exhibits that have attracted 1.5 million
visitors in the last four years

Broward Center for the Performing Arts
- Hosts more than 700,000 patrons and over
700 performances annually
- Home to the Florida Grand Opera, Miami
City Ballet, Symphony of the Americas, Gold
Coast Jazz Society

Riverwalk
- A 1.5-mile linear park along downtown’s
New River with brick walkways, lush
greenery and pedestrian amenities
- Attracts more than 1.5 million visitors each
year
- Home to water taxis and guided waterway
tours

SPORTS
-

Florida Marlins (MLB)
Florida Panthers (NHL)
Miami Dolphins (NFL)
Miami Heat (NBA)

-

Fort Lauderdale Strikers (NASL)
NFL Alumni
Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex
International Swimming Hall of Fame

TOURISM
- Greater Fort Lauderdale hosted 12 million
visitors in 2012 who spent $10 billion
- Hotel occupancy averaged 72.7%
- Tourism generated tax revenues of $43.8
million (derived from 5% bed tax collected
by area hotels)
- Greater Fort Lauderdale attracted 2.8

272 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

million international visitors in 2012
including 992,813 from Canada, 729,114
from Latin America, 392,482 from Europe,
253,652 from Scandinavia, 197,589 from
the United Kingdom and 253,652 from
various other foreign countries

A Desirable City for A Successful Business
COLLEGES/UNIVERSITIES
-

-

Broward College
City College of Fort Lauderdale
Florida Atlantic University
Florida International University

Kaplan University
Nova Southeastern University
Strayer University
University of Phoenix

VOCATIONAL/TECHNICAL
- Florida Language Center
- Florida Ocean Sciences Institute
- Keiser Career College

- The Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale
- Atlantic, McFatter and Sheridan Technical
Centers

PUBLIC HOSPITAL AUTHORITY
- Broward Health

ACUTE CARE HOSPITALS
- Broward Health
- Holy Cross Hospital

- Imperial Point Medical Center

LABOR AND INDUSTRY
Greater Fort Lauderdale / Broward County:
- Labor Force (August 2013)
- Employed (August 2013)
- Unemployed (August 2013)
- Unemployment Rate (August 2013)

1,030,175
972,192
57,983
5.6%

Source: Florida Agency for Workforce Innovation, Labor Market Statistics Center, Local Area Unemployment
Statistics Program in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Labor, and Bureau of Labor Statistics.

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 273

Nonagricultural Employment by Industry
October 2013
Greater Fort Lauderdale/Broward County
Industry

Number of Employees

Goods Producing

61,800

Construction

35,100

Manufacturing

26,600

Other

100

Service Providing
Trade, Transportation, Utilities

691,500
176,600

Information

18,400

Financial Activities

57,400

Professional and Business Services

122,300

Education and Health Services

97,200

Leisure and Hospitality

84,900

Government (Federal, State, Local)

99,500

Other Services

35,200

Total Nonagricultural Employment

753,300

Source: Florida Agency for Workforce Innovation, Labor Market Statistics Center, Local Area Unemployment
Statistics Program in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Labor, and Bureau of Labor Statistics.

274 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Glossary of Terms
Accrual Basis - The basis of accounting under
which transactions are recognized when they
occur, regardless of when related cash is actually
received or spent
Ad Valorem Taxes - Property taxes calculated as
a percentage of the value of real or personal
property. The percentage is expressed in mills
(thousands of dollars)
Amended Budget - The current budget, resulting
from changes to the Adopted Budget
Annexation - A process by which a city adds land
to its jurisdiction. The city then extends its
services, laws and voting privileges to meet the
needs of residents living in the annexed area.
Appropriation - The City Commission’s legal
authorization for the City to make expenditures
and incur obligations
Arts and Science District Garage - The
Performing Arts Center and Authority is a 950
space parking garage located in the Arts and
Science District of the City, with the City having
full and exclusive responsibility for operations
and maintenance of the garage
Assessed Value - The County Property
Appraiser’s estimation of the Fair Market Value
of real estate or other property. This valuation is
used to determine taxes levied upon the
property
Audit - An examination of evidence, including
records, facilities, inventories, systems, etc., to
discover or verify desired information
Balanced Budget - According to Florida Statute,
the amount available from taxation and other
sources, including amounts carried over from
prior fiscal years, must equal the total
appropriations for expenditures and reserves

Benchmarking - Determining the quality of
products, services and practices my measuring
critical factors (e.g., how fast, how reliable a
product or service is) and comparing the results
to those of highly regarded competitors
Block Grant - Federal grant allocated according
to pre-determined formulas and for use within a
pre-approved broad functional area such as the
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
CDBG funding can be used as a funding source
for qualified projects
Bond - Financial obligation for which the issuer
promises to pay the bondholder (the purchaser
or owner of the bond) a specified stream of
future cash flows, including periodic interest
payments and a principal repayment
Budget - A statement of the City’s financial
position for a specific period of time (fiscal year)
based on estimates of expenditures during the
period. Also, the amount of money available,
required, or assigned for a particular purpose
Budget Calendar - A schedule of key dates which
the City follows in the preparation, adoption and
administration of the budget
Cash Flow - A projection of the cash receipts and
disbursements anticipated during a given time
period
Capital Outlays - Outlays for the acquisition of,
or addition to, fixed assets which are durable in
nature and cost at least $5,000. Such outlays are
charged as expenditures through an individual
department’s operating budget and do not
include those provided for in the Capital
Improvement Program (see capital projects)
Capital Projects - Any program, project, or
purchase with a useful life span of ten years and
a cost of at least $50,000

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 275

Glossary of Terms
Carry Forward - Fund balances that are carried
forward into the next fiscal year
Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund - Fund
established to account for the City’s four
cemeteries: Woodlawn, Evergreen, Sunset
Memorial Gardens, and Lauderdale Memorial
Park

Deficit - The amount by which expenditures
exceed revenues during a single accounting
period
Depreciation - The decline in the value of assets
as a result of wear and tear, age, or obsolescence

Community Investment Plan - Annually prepared
summary plan and list of capital improvement
projects proposed during the next five fiscal
years, such as street or park improvements,
building construction, and various kinds of major
facility maintenance

Development Review Community (DRC) - The
DRC is comprised of representatives from the
Planning and Zoning, Economic Development,
Fire-Rescue, Police, and Public Services
departments. It facilitates the review of plans for
private development to ensure quality, design,
and compatibility with existing residential and
commercial development

Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) - A
special taxing district. The City has designated
two areas: Central Beach and Northwest
Progresso Flagler Heights as CRA districts

Direct Debt - Debt, which the City has incurred in
its own name or assumed through the
annexation of territory or consolidation with
another governmental unit

Comprehensive Plan - A method to utilize and
strengthen the existing role, processes and
powers of local governments to establish and
implement comprehensive planning programs
which guide and control future development

Encumbrances - Commitments of funds for
contracts and services to be performed. When
encumbrances
are
recorded,
available
appropriations are reduced correspondingly

Contingency - A budgetary reserve set aside for
emergency or unanticipated expenditures. The
City Commission must approve all contingency
expenditures
Debt Financing - Issuance of bonds and other
debt instruments to finance municipal
improvements and services
Debt Proceeds - Revenue derived from the sale
of bonds
Debt Service Funds - Funds created to pay for
the principal and interest of all bonds and other
debt instruments according to a predetermined
schedule

276 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Enterprise Funds - Funds established to account
for operations, which are financed and operated
in a manner similar to private enterprises. The
intent is that the expense of providing goods or
services to the public on a continuing basis
(including depreciation) be financed or recovered
primarily through user fees
Estimated Revenues - Projections of funds to be
received during the fiscal year
Expenditures - Cost of goods delivered or
services provided, including operating expenses,
capital outlays, and debt service
Fiscal Year - The 12-month period to which the
annual budget applies. The City’s fiscal year
begins on October 1 and ends September 30

Glossary of Terms
FL²STAT - Community-focused approach to
strategic planning, performance management
and process improvement for all City
departments

Grants - Contributions of cash or other assets
from another governmental agency to be used or
expended for a specified purpose, activity, or
facility

Florida Power and Light - A private electrical
utility company that provides significant
franchise fees and utility tax revenue to the City

Governmental Funds - Funds in which most
governmental functions of the City are financed.
The funds are fiscal and accounting entities with
a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash
and other financial resources along with all
related liabilities and residual equities or
balances and related changes

Foreign-Trade Zone - A Foreign-Trade Zone (FTZ)
is an area that, for US Customs purposes, is
considered to be an international commerce.
Any foreign or domestic material can be moved
into an FTZ without being subject to US Customs
duties. An FTZ is operated as a public venture
sponsored by a local municipality or authority
Franchise Fees - Fees levied by the City in return
for granting a privilege, which permits the
continual use of public property, such as city
streets, and usually involves the elements of
monopoly and regulation

Homestead Exemption – Pursuant to the Florida
State Constitution, the first $25,000 of assessed
value of a home which the owner occupies as
principal residence is exempt for the property
value
Infrastructure - the physical assets of a
government (e.g., streets, water, sewer, public
buildings and parks)

Full Time Equivalent - Refers to the number of
full time employees, plus all part time and
seasonal employees pro-rated to full time
increments

Intergovernmental Revenues - Funds received
from federal, state, and other local governmental
sources in the form of grants, shared revenues,
and payments in lieu of taxes (PILOT)

Fund - A fiscal and accounting entity with a selfbalancing set of accounts recording cash and
other financial resources along with all related
liabilities and residual equities or balances and
related changes These accounts are segregated
for the purpose of carrying on specific activities
or attaining certain objectives in accordance with
special regulations, restrictions, or limitations

Internal Service Funds - Funds established for
the financing of goods or services provided by
one department to other departments within the
City on a cost-reimbursement basis. Examples
are the Vehicle Rental, Central Services, and City
Insurance funds

Fund Balance - Fund equity for governmental
and trust funds which reflect the accumulated
excess of revenues and other financing sources
over expenditures and other uses for general
governmental functions
General Fund - The fund used to account for all
financial resources except those required to be
accounted for in another fund

Maintenance Capital - A maintenance project
that exceeds $150,000 and requires multiple
fiscal years for completion
Millage Rate - One mill equals $100 of tax for
each $1,000 of property value. The millage rate is
the total number of mills of tax assessed against
the value
Modified Accrual Basis - The basis of accounting
under which transactions are recognized when
FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 277

Glossary of Terms
they become both measurable (i.e., an amount
can be determined) and available (i.e., able to
liquidate liabilities of the current period)
Non-Self-Supported Debt - Bonds for which
payment in full faith and credit of the City or
specific general revenue is pledged. This debt is
payable from property taxes and other general
revenue. Excise Tax Bonds are an example of this
type of debt
Ordinance - A formal legislative enactment by
the City that carries the full force and effect of
the law within corporate boundaries of the City
unless in conflict with any higher form of law,
such as state or federal
Overlapping Debt - The proportionate share of
the debts of local governmental units located
wholly or in part within the limits of the City
(such as the County and School Board) which
must be borne by property owners within the
City
Performance Indicators - Special qualitative and
quantitative measures of work performed as an
objective of a department.
Reserves - A portion of the fund balance or
retained earnings legally segregated for specific
purposes
Resolution - A legislative act by the City with less
legal formality than an ordinance.
Revenue - Additions to assets which do not
increase any liability or represent the recovery of
an expenditure; do not represent the
cancellation of certain liabilities or decreases in
assets; and do not represent contributions of
fund capital in enterprise and internal service
funds
Revised Budget - A department’s authorized
budget as modified by City Commission action,
through
appropriation
transfers
from
278 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

contingency, or transfers from or to another
department or fund
Rolled Back Rate - The millage necessary to raise
the same amount of ad valorem tax revenue as
the previous year, excluding taxes from new
construction
Save Our Homes - State constitutional
amendment that limits annual growth in
homesteaded residential property value for tax
purposes
Strategic Planning - A document outlining longterm goals, critical issues and action plans which
will increase the organization’s effectiveness in
attaining its mission, priorities, goals and
objectives.
Taxes - Compulsory charges levied by a
government for the purpose of financing services
performed for the common benefit of the people
To Hire a Worker Process - Refers to the
authorization procedures followed to hire
employees
User Fee - Charges for specific services provided
only to those paying such charges. Examples
would be sewer service charges and dock fees
Utility Taxes - Municipal charges levied by the
City on every purchase of a public service within
its corporate limits, including electricity, gas, fuel
oil, water, and telephone service
WaterWorks 2011 - A ten-year, $768 million
Capital Improvement Program for replacement
of water and sewer and wastewater
infrastructure
Working Capital Reserve - The working capital
reserve represents General Fund resources that
are for purposes of providing liquidity in the
event of future adverse financial conditions

Abbreviations & Acronyms
A
ACE - Achievement in Community Excellence
ADA - Americans with Disabilities Act
APWA - American Public Works Association
ARFF - Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighting
ATCT - Air Traffic Control Tower

B
BCIP - Business Capital Improvement Program
BID - Beach Business Improvement District,
special taxing district
BOA - Board of Adjustment
BRAB - Beach Redevelopment Advisory Board

COPJAM - Community Oriented Policing Juvenile
Alternative Motivation
CPI - Consumer Price Index
CPG - City Parking Garage parking facility
CPSE - Center for Public Safety Excellence
CRA - Community Redevelopment Agency
CWA - Clean Water Act

D
DDA - Downtown Development Authority, an
independent special taxing district
DEP - Department of Environmental Protection
DRC - Development Review Committee
DRI - Development of Regional Impact

BSO - BuySpeed Online

C
CAAP - Commission Annual Action Plan
CAD - Computer Aided Dispatch
CAFR - Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
CBT - Central Broward Transit
CDBG - Community Development Block Grant
CEB - Code Enforcement Board
CEO - Chief Executive Officer
CERT - Community Emergency Response Team
CDL - Commercial Driver’s Licenses
CFS - Calls for Service in the Police Department
CID - Criminal Investigation Division
CIP - Capital Improvement Program
CLERP - Conservation Land Ecological Restoration
Program
CLG - Certified Local Government
COMPSTAT - Computer Statistics System
COOP - Continuity of Operations Plan

DROP - Deferred Retirement Option Program
DRT - Design Review Team

E
EAR - Evaluation and Appraisal Report
EEO - Equal Employment Opportunity
EFT - Electronic Funds Transfer
EKG - Electrocardiogram
EMS - Emergency Medical Services
EMT - Emergency Medical Technicians
EOC - Emergency Operations Center
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency
ESP - Enterprise Spend Platform
EVDO/GPS - Evolution Data Optimized/Global
Positioning System

F
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration
FDOT - Florida Department of Transportation
FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 279

Abbreviations & Acronyms
FIFC - Florida Intergovernmental Financing
Commission

HOPWA - Housing Opportunities for Persons with
AIDS

FIND - Florida Inland Navigation District

HPB - Historic Preservation Board

FIU - Florida International University

HSMV - Highway Safety and Motor Vehicle

FLL - Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International
Airport

HUD - Housing and Urban Development

FLAC - Fort Lauderdale Aquatic Complex
FMLA - Family Medical Leave Act
FOP - Fraternal Order of Police
FPL - Florida Power and Light
FRDAP - Florida Recreation Development
Assistance Program

HVAC - Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning

I
IAFF - International Association of Fire Fighters
ICVS - In-Car Video System
IDIS - Integrated Disbursement Information
System
ISHOF - International Swimming Hall of Fame

FRMBC - Florida Regional Minority Business
Council

IT - Information Technology

FRPA - Florida Recreation and Park Association

IVR - Interactive Voice Response

FTE - Full Time Equivalent
FXE - FAA Airport identifier for the Fort
Lauderdale Executive Airport
FY - Fiscal Year

G

K
KAPOW - Kids and the Power of Work

L
LEED - Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design

GAAP - Generally Accepted Accounting Principles

LPR - License Plate Recognition System

GASB - Governmental Accounting Standards
Board

LWCF - Land Water Conservation Fund

GED - General Equivalency Diploma
GFOA - Government Finance Officers Association
GIS - Geographic Information System
GOB - General Obligation Bond
GREAT - Gang Resistance Education and Training
GTL - George T. Lohmeyer

H
HARS - Highway Advisories

M
MDT - Mobile Data Terminal
MPO - Metropolitan Planning Organization
MOU - Memorandum of Understanding
M/WBE - Minority and Women’s Business
Enterprises

N
NCIC - National Crime Information Center

HazMat - Hazardous Material

NCIP - Neighborhood Capital Improvement
Program

HERA - Housing and economic Recovery Act

NDAA - National Defense Authorization Act

280 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Abbreviations & Acronyms
NELAC - National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Certification

S
SCADA - Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition

NIGP - National Institute of Governmental
Purchasing

SDWA - Safe Drinking Water Act

NIMS - National Incident Management System

SFWMD - South Florida Water Management
District

NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
NPI - National Purchasing Institute

SFECCTA - South Florida East Coast Corridor
Transit Analysis

NSP - Neighborhood Stabilization Program

SHIP - State Housing Initiative Partnership
Program

NWPFH - Northwest Progresso Flagler Heights

SID - Special Investigations Division

O

SIS - Strategic Intermodal System

OJT - On the Job Training

SM - Special Magistrate

OPEB - Other Post- Employment Benefits

SMART - Specific, Measurable, Attainable,
Realistic, and Timely

OSHG - On-Site Hypochlorite Generation

P

STRU - Short Term Residential Use

T

PACA - Performing Arts Center Authority
PAVe - Personally Assigned Vehicle program in
the Police Department
PILOT - Payment in Lieu of Taxes
PM - Preventative Maintenance

TEAM - Transportation Electronic Award
Management
TEC - Technical Coordinating Committee
TIF - Tax Increment Financing

PROP - Police Referral Outreach Program

THAW - To Hire a Worker Process refers to the
authorization procedures followed to hire
employees

PSA - Public Safety Aide

THOR - Transit Housing Oriented Redevelopment

PZ - Planning and Zoning

TRIM - Truth in Millage

PMT - Program Management Team

Q
QTI - Qualified Target Industry

R
RAC - Regional Activity Center
RFP - Request for Proposal

U
ULDR - Unified Land Development Regulation
USB - Universal Serial Bus
USTA - United States Tennis Association
W

ROI - Return on Investment

WMA - War Memorial Auditorium

RPA - Requisition Purchase Order Payment
Authorization

WTP - Water Treatment Plant

FY 2014 Adopted Budget - 281

282 - FY 2014 Adopted Budget

Mayor John P. “Jack” Seiler
Vice Mayor Bruce G. Roberts, District I
Commissioner Dean J. Trantalis, District II
Commissioner Bobby B. DuBose, District III
Commissioner Romney Rogers, District IV
Lee R. Feldman, City Manager
If you would like this publication in an alternate format, please call (954) 828-4755 or email webmaster@fortlauderdale.gov.

